Class 16 Exercises

1.	idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno mettaṃ kāyakammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi c'eva raho ca. MN 48 
Here, monks, a monk has established (lit: there is established for a monk) kind bodily action(s) in regard to his spiritual companions, openly and even privately.
2.	% na brāhmaṇassa pahareyya, n'āssa muñcetha brāhmaṇo, 
dhī brāhmaṇassa hantāraṃ, tato dhī y'assa muñcati. DHP 389
One should not strike a brahmin, (but) a brahmin should not get angry with that one (who hits him); woe on the striker of a brahmin! More woe on him, whoever gets angry with one (who hits him)!
3.	yass'atthāya kulaputtā samma'd'eva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti tad'anuttaraṃ brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭh'eva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. SN 22.63
He dwells having reached even in this life that unsurpassed perfection of the holy life, for the purpose of which sons of respectable families rightly go forth from home to homelessness, having experienced it for himself by direct knowledge.
4.	iti'ss'ime tayo dhammā sammādiṭṭhiṃ anuparidhāvanti anuparivattanti, seyyath'idaṃ, sammādiṭṭhi, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati. MN 117
Thus, for him these three states circle around, rotate around right view; that is, right view, right effort, [and] right mindfulness.
5.	ubhatodaṇḍakena ce’pi kakacena corā ocarakā aṅgam’aṅgāni okanteyyuṃ, tatrā’pi yo mano padūseyya, na me so tena sāsanakaro. MN 21
Even if mean thieves should cut off [your] [limbs] limb by limb with a double-handled saw, even in that case, he who would cause the mind to be corrupt because of that is not one practising my teaching.
6.	yaṃ pan’āniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāma-dhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ — ‘etaṃ mama, eso’ham’asmi, eso me attā’ti? “no h’etaṃ, bhante”. SN 22.59
Whatever is impermanent, suffering, and of a changing nature, is it suitable to regard that as “this [is] mine, this I am, this [is] my self”? Certainly not (lit: this indeed not), venerable sir.
7.	iti kho pan’etaṃ vuttaṃ. kiñ’c’etaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? MN 139
Thus, indeed, it has been said. And depending on what has this been said?
8.	$ abhijānāmi kho pan'āhaṃ, sāriputta, caturaṅgasamannāgataṃ brahmacariyaṃ caritā, tapassī su'daṃ homi paramatapassī MN 12
And certainly, Sāriputta, I recall [that] I [was] an ascetic, one who practiced the spiritual path endowed with four components. Truly, I was that, a supreme ascetic.
9.	tass'eva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno abhijjhā hoti chando sārāgo. sv'āssa pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tāl'āvatthukato anabhāvaṃkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. MN 140
Formerly, indeed, for that ignorant one, there was covetousness, desire and passion. [But now] for him that has been abandoned, it has been uprooted like a palm tree, totally annihilated, never arising again in the future.
10.	santi loke munayo, janā vadanti ta'y'idaṃ kathaṃsu, 
ñāṇ'ūpapannaṃ no muniṃ vadanti, udāhu ve jīviten'ūpapannaṃ. 
SNP 62
There are sages in the world, people say, but how is that so? Do they call one a sage because of knowledge or rather because of the way of life?
11.	 % yathā'pi mūle anupaddave daḷhe, 
chinno'pi rukkho puna'r'eva rūhati, 
evam'pi taṇh'ānusaye anūhate, 
nibbattatī dukkham'idaṃ punappunaṃ.  DHP 338
Just as when a root is free from danger and strong, even if the tree is cut down, it grows again; similarly, when the underlying tendency of craving is not uprooted, suffering arises again and again.
12.	% saññācikāya pana bhikkhunā kuṭiṃ kārayamānena, assāmikaṃ att’uddesaṃ, pamāṇikā kāretabbā. tatr'idaṃ pamāṇaṃ: dīghaso dvādasa vidatthiyo sugatavidatthiyā, tiriyaṃ satt'antarā. VIN PAT SA 6 
By a monk having a hut made by means of his own begged requisites, without an owner and intended for himself, (the hut) is to be made according to correct measurement. In this case, this is the standard:
Twelve spans of the sugata-span in length [and] seven [span] across inside.
13.	$ yassa rāgo ca doso ca, māno makkho ca pātito, 
sāsapo'r'iva ār'aggā, tam'ahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ. DHP 407
[One] for whom desire and ill-will, conceit and denigrating are dropped (caused to fall), like a mustard seed from the tip of a needle - that one I call a brahmin. 
14.	$ atha kiñ'carahi ty'āyaṃ, sāriputta, uḷārā āsabhī vācā bhāsitā, ek'aṃso gahito, sīhanādo nadito SN 47.12
So, how is it then, Sāriputta, that this lofty, imposing statement, taken as  definite, has been spoken, (that) a lion's roar has been roared by you?

 
Class 16 Tipiṭaka Examples

AN 8.53  neso dhammo neso vinayo netaṃ satthusāsananti	
This is not the teaching, this is not the discipline, this is not the teacher’s instruction. 	
				
SN 12.63 cattārome, bhikkhave, āhārā bhūtānaṃ vā sattānaṃ ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnaṃ vā anuggahāya.	
Monks, there are these four fuels for the maintenance of existing sentient beings or for the support of those seeking birth. 	
				
AN 4.45 na cāhaṃ, āvuso, appatvāva lokassa antaṃ dukkhassa antakiriyaṃ vadāmi.	
But I also say, friends, that without reaching the end of the world, (there is) no ending of suffering.	
				
AN 2.89 dveme, bhikkhave, dhammā. katame dve? paggāho ca avikkhepo ca.	
Monks there are these two things. What two? Effort and tranquility.	
				
SN 22.81 ekova bhagavā tasmiṃ samaye viharitukāmo hoti na bhagavā tasmiṃ samaye kenaci anubandhitabbo hotīti	
“At that time the Buddha wishes to just live alone, at that time he should not be followed by anyone.”	
				
MN 18 $ esevanto rāgānusayānaṃ, esevanto paṭighānusayānaṃ, esevanto diṭṭhānusayānaṃ.	
Just this is the end of the latent tendencies to passion, just this is the end of the latent tendencies to aversion, just this is the end of the latent tendencies to view.	
				
SN 9.3 sacepi dasa pajjote,
dhārayissasi kassapa,
neva dakkhati rūpāni,
cakkhu hissa na vijjatīti.	
Even if you would carry ten lamps, Kassapa, he would not see forms, because he does not have sight.	
				
MN 95 no cetaṃ chando jāyetha, nayidaṃ ussaheyya.	
If one would not arouse intention, one would not strive. 	
				
SN 47.10 yassa khvāhaṃ atthāya cittaṃ paṇidahiṃ so me attho abhinipphanno	
The purpose for which I directed the mind has definitely been accomplished by me. 	
				
AN 5.57 maraṇadhammomhi, maraṇaṃ anatītoti abhiṇhaṃ paccavekkhitabbaṃ itthiyā vā purisena vā gahaṭṭhena vā pabbajitena vā.	
“I am of the nature to die, I have not overcome death,” should be reflected on often by a man or a man, a householder or a renunciant. 	
				
SNP 7 $ disvāna bhagavantaṃ etadavoca, tatreva, muṇḍaka, tatreva, samaṇaka, tatreva, vasalaka tiṭṭhāhīti.	
As soon as he saw the Fortunate One he said, “Stay right there, baldy! Stay right there, tramp! Stay right there, outcast!”	
				
SNP 7 ekajaṃ vā dvijaṃ vāpi,
yodha pāṇaṃ vihiṃsati,
yassa pāṇe dayā natthi,
taṃ jaññā vasalo iti.	
Whoever here harms a living being, once born or even twice born,
who has no compassion for a living being, one should know him as an “outcast”.	
MN 3 yaṃnūnāhaṃ imaṃ piṇḍapātaṃ bhuñjitvā jighacchādubbalyaṃ paṭivinodetvā evaṃ imaṃ rattindivaṃ vītināmeyyanti.	
What if I were to eat this alms-food, get rid of hunger and weakness, and spend this night and day in this way. 	
				
AN 4.35 neva kho tyāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, anumodāmi na paṭikkosāmi.	
I neither agree with you, Brahmin, nor do I disagree with you. 	
DHP 62
puttā matthi dhanammatthi. iti bālo vihaññati.
attā hi attano natthi, kuto puttā kuto dhanaṃ.	
A fool suffers hardship, [thinking], ‘I have sons, I have wealth’; He even does not own himself, let alone sons, let alone wealth.


 
Class 17 Exercises 


1.	evam'eva kho, sunakkhatta, ṭhānam'etaṃ vijjati yaṃ idh'ekacco purisapuggalo lok'āmis'ādhimutto assa. MN 105
In the same way, Sunakkhatta, is it possible that here an individual person would be focused on material pleasure.
2.	% sāmaṃ vā taṃ, ānanda, kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti, yaṃpaccay'āssa taṃ uppajjati ajjhattaṃ sukhadukkhaṃ SN 12.25
[Either] by himself he generates that bodily formation on account of which pleasure and pain arise for him internally or…
3.	tassa purisassa uttiṇṇassa pāraṅ’gatassa evam’assa – bahukāro kho me ayaṃ kullo, im’āhaṃ kullaṃ nissāya hatthehi ca pādehi ca vāyamamāno sotthinā pāraṃ uttiṇṇo. MN 22
When that person had crossed over and reached the far shore, he would think thus:
This raft, indeed, [was] extremely helpful for me; being supported by this raft [and] exerting myself with (my) hands and (my) feet, I safely crossed over to the far shore.
4.	ev'āhaṁ ajānanto ‘evarūpaṁ sukhaṁ vedanaṁ pajahathā’ti vadeyyaṁ MN 70
Not knowing [this], I could myself [then] say, “abandon this kind of pleasant feeling”.
5.	$ ekam'id'āhaṃ, bhikkhave, samayaṃ ukkaṭṭhāyaṃ viharāmi subhagavane sālarājamūle. MN 49
On this one occasion, monks, I was dwelling in the blessed wood, in Ukkaṭṭhā, at the root of a king of sāl trees.
6.	phalam'icchaṃ'va vanasmi vānaro. DHP 334
[like] a monkey wishing only for fruit in a forest grove.
7.	coro'si, bālo'si, mūḷho'si, theno'sī'ti, tathārūpaṃ bhikkhu adinnaṃ ādiyamāno, ayam'pi pārājiko hoti asaṃvāso. VIN PAT PA 2
“You are a robber! You are a fool! You are a deluded man! You are a thief!”, a monk, taking what has not been given of such a kind, this one also is defeated, unaffiliated.
8.	tatiyam'pi kho āyasmā ānando abhikkantāya rattiyā ... yena bhagavā ten'añjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etad'avoca. UD 45
Again, for the third time, as the night was (already) advanced, the venerable Ānanda, holding (hands forward in) añjali towards the Blessed One, said this to the Blessed one:
9.	yāvañ’c’idaṃ, bhikkhave, alam’eva sabbasaṅkhāresu nibbindituṃ alaṃ virajjituṃ alaṃ vimuccitun'ti. SN 15.1
“In this regard, monks, it is quite enough to become disenchanted in regard to all formations, enough to become detached [from them], enough to become free [from them].”
10.	etādisāni katvāna, sabbattha’m’aparājitā. sabbattha sotthiṃ gacchanti, taṃ tesaṃ maṅgalam’uttaman'ti. SNP 16
“Having done [things] of this kind, unconquered everywhere, they go everywhere safely; this is for them highest blessing”
11.	ehi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, indriyesu guttadvāro hohi, cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā mā nimittaggāhī hohi m’ānubyañjanaggāhī. MN 107
Come, monk, be one who has the doors guarded in regard to the sense faculties; having seen a form with the eye, do not be one enticed by appearances, do not be one grasping after features.
12.	% iti uddham’adho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjhena pharitvā viharati DN 13.8
Thus, having suffused the world – above, below, across, everywhere, to all beings – with a mind filled with goodwill, [that is] vast, exalted, immeasurable, free of ill-will, [and] not with malevolence, he dwells.  
13.	anūpavādo anūpaghāto, pātimokkhe ca saṃvaro DHP 185
Not insulting, not harming; and restraint according to the disciplinary code.
14.	$ sa ve vitakkāni vicāritāni, sameti vuṭṭhī’va rajaṃ samūhataṃ ITI 87 
One truly calms investigated thoughts like rainfall that has removed dust.
15.	$ attā me uppajjati ca veti cā’ti icc’assa evam'āgataṃ hoti. MN 148
…and so he would thus conclude (lit: and so to him, it is thus concluded), “my self arises and disappears.”
16.	$ icc’evaṃ vippalapantiṃ, phandamānaṃ tato tato. VV 52
thus like this chattering, trembling on account of this or that.


 
Class 17 Tipiṭaka Examples


UD 45. $ dutiyampi kho bhagavā tuṇhī ahosi.	
For the second time, the Blessed One was silent. 	
				
AN 8.53  yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā ekā vūpakaṭṭhā appamattā ātāpinī pahitattā vihareyyan’ti	
Having heard the Buddha’s teaching, I could live alone, in solitude, heedful, burning, with resolute determination. 	
				
AN 5.57 sa kho so, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati, na kho ahaññeveko jarādhammo jaraṃ anatīto	
This being the case, a disciple of the Buddha reflects in this way, “I am not the only (one) who is of the nature to get old, who has not overcome aging.”	
				
SN 22.95 kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, pheṇapiṇḍe sāro?	
Monks, indeed what substance could there be in a lump of foam?	
	
MN 11 
idamavoca bhagavā. attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. 	
The Blessed One said this. Those monks were delighted and pleased with the utterance/the words of the Blessed One.	
	
DHP 2 manopubbaṅgamā dhammā, manoseṭṭhā manomayā	
All mental phenomena are preceded by mind, led by mind and created by mind.
(Buddharakkhita): Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief, they are all mind-wrought.	
				
AN 3.70 yadapi, bhikkhave, alobho tadapi kusalamūlaṃ. yadapi aluddho abhisaṅkharoti kāyena vācāya manasā tadapi kusalaṃ.	
Whatever, monks, is not greed, that is a wholesome root. Whatever a non-greedy person creates by body, by speech or by mind, that too is wholesome.
(Sujato) Contentment is a root of the skilful. When a contented person chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skilful.	
				
MN 19 yaññadeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu bahulamanuvitakketi anuvicāreti, tathā tathā nati hoti cetaso.	
Whatever a monk thinks and ponders about often, such is the inclination of his mind.	
				
AN 4.45 api cāhaṃ, āvuso, imasmiṃyeva byāmamatte kaḷebare sasaññimhi samanake lokañca paññāpemi lokasamudayañca lokanirodhañca lokanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadan'ti.	
I also declare, friends, in this very fathom length body with its perception and intelligence (is) the world, the source of the world, the end of the world, and the path of practice leading to the end of the world. 	
				
AN 10.61 evañcetaṃ, bhikkhave, vuccati, atha ca pana paññāyati, ‘idappaccayā avijjā’ti	
Even if it is spoken this way, monks, it is still evident: "Ignorance is on account of a specific condition". 	
				
AN 4.45 $  bhūtapubbāhaṃ, bhante, rohitasso nāma isi ahosiṃ bhojaputto iddhimā vehāsaṅgamo.	
Once upon a time, sir, I was a sage called Rohitassa, son of Bhoja, a sky walker with psychic powers. 	


 
Class 18 Exercises 

1.	yāvatatiyañ'ce samanubhāsiyamāno taṃ paṭinissajjeyya, icc'etaṃ kusalaṃ, no ce paṭinissajjeyya, saṅghādiseso. VIN PAT SA 10
If, being admonished up to the third time, he should relinquish that, thus this [is] good; [but] if he should not relinquish [it], [this is a case] relating to the community in the beginning and in the end.
2.	“ye kec'ime isayo manujā, (icc'āyasmā puṇṇako) SNP 58
Whichever of these human beings [are] seers. (Thus said venerable Puṇṇaka)
3.	$ tatth'āyaṃ samayo ‘diyaḍḍho māso seso gimhānan'ti vassānassa paṭhamo māso icc'ete aḍḍhateyyamāsā VIN PAT PC 57
This (is) the time in this case: One-and-a-half months (are) remaining of the hot season and the first month of the rainy season, thus these two-and-a-half months, ...
4.	idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā piyarūpe rūpe n'ādhimuccati, appiyarūpe rūpe na byāpajjati, upaṭṭhitakāyassati ca viharati appamāṇacetaso SN 35.247
Here, monks, having seen a form with the eye, a monk is not drawn to a pleasing form, and he is not repelled by an unpleasant form; with mindfulness of the body present, he dwells with an immeasurable mind.
5.	% idha, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo yam'enaṃ hatthidammasārathi kāraṇaṃ kāreti, yadi vā katapubbaṃ yadi vā akatapubbaṃ, taṃ aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbaṃ cetasā samannāharitvā ohitasoto suṇāti. AN 5.140
Here, monks, a king’s bull elephant
to whichever task the elephant trainer has him perform,
whether [it] has been previously done or not previously done,
having focused and paid attention on that (task), having concentrated completely with the mind, he listens with applied ear.
6.	$ gopālako sāyanhasamaye sāmikānaṃ gāvo niyyātetvā iti paṭisañcikkhati: "ajja kho gāvo amukasmiñ'ca amukasmiñ'ca padese cariṃsu" AN 3.71
In the evening, a young cowherd, having handed over the cattle to the owners, reflects thus: “Today, indeed, the cattle grazed in this place and in that place…”
7.	$ māno hi te brāhmaṇa khāribhāro, kodho dhūmo bhasmani mosavajjaṃ SN 7.9 
Conceit, O brahmin, is indeed the burden carried across your shoulders; anger the smoke, false speech (is in) the ashes.
8.	% mā tvaṃ adhammo ācarito, asmā kumbham'iv'ābhidā'ti. VIN 2.7.7
“Misconduct is not [to be] practiced; [it is] like a rock that shattered a clay pot .” 
or 
"Don't you, one who practiced misconduct, break, like a stone a clay pot."
9.	$ idha, bhikkhave, mahācoro rājānaṃ vā rājamahāmattānaṃ vā nissito hoti. AN 3.51 
Here, monks, a master thief is dependent on kings or the royal ministers.
10.	cattāro'me, bhikkhave, acchariyā abbhutā dhammā raññe cakkavattimhi. katame cattāro? DN 16.32
Monks, [there are] these four wonderful, extraordinary qualities about a wheel-turning monarch. Which four?
11.	% app’ekad’āhaṃ, bho raṭṭhapāla, ‘idha pādaṃ karissāmī’ti aññen’eva pādaṃ karomī"ti. MN 82
“Just sometimes, master Raṭṭhapāla, thinking, "I will place the foot here", I place it at (lit.: with) another (place).”

 
Class 18 Tipiṭaka Examples


AN 5.51 byāpādo, bhikkhave, āvaraṇo nīvaraṇo cetaso ajjhāruho paññāya dubbalīkaraṇo.	
Monks, ill will is an obstruction, a hindrance of the mind, which overwhelms and weakens understanding. 	
				
SNP 54 
theyyaṃ na kāre na musā bhaṇeyya,
mettāya phasse tasathāvarāni,
yadāvilattaṃ manaso vijaññā,
kaṇhassa pakkho'ti vinodayeyya.	
One should not perform theft,
One should not speak falsely,
One should touch unstable and firm beings with kindness,
One should know any disturbance of mind and dispel it as “a flank of the 
Dark One.”	
				
AN 8.2 tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā.	
(the reading tathārūpassa also exists)	
Teachings of such quality are well-learned by him, remembered, verbally practised, mentally reflected upon, and thoroughly understood by view.	
				
DN 22.6 puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu imameva kāyaṃ yathāṭhitaṃ yathāpaṇihitaṃ dhātuso paccavekkhati, atthi imasmiṃ kāye pathavīdhātu āpodhātu tejodhātu vāyodhātū'ti.	
And further, monks, a monk regards this body, as it is positioned, as it is directed, as elemental states. “In this very body there is the solid state, the liquid state, the fire state and the air state.”	
				
DHP 160 attā hi attano nātho,
ko hi nātho paro siyā,
attanā hi sudantena,
nāthaṃ labhati dullabhaṃ.

	
One is truly one’s own protector,
How could another be (one’s) protector?
With oneself truly well-tamed
one obtains a protector that is hard to get. 	
				
SN 22.1 na rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, na rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; na attani vā rūpaṃ, na rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. ‘ahaṃ rūpaṃ, mama rūpan’ti na pariyuṭṭhaṭṭhāyī hoti.	
He does not consider physical form as the self, or the self as having physical form, or physical form as in the self, or the self as in physical form. He does not remain obsessed (by the idea) “I am physical form, physical form is mine.”	
				
AN 2.40 yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye rājāno balavanto honti, corā tasmiṃ samaye dubbalā honti. tasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye rañño phāsu hoti atiyātuṃ vā niyyātuṃ vā paccantime vā janapade anusaññātuṃ.	
At whichever time kings are strong, robbers are weak. At that time it is easy for the king to re-enter or to go out and to visit the outlying districts. 	
				
AN 3.83 tassa na tādiso vaṇṇo hoti seyyathā'pi gunnaṃ, na tādiso saro hoti seyyathā'pi gunnaṃ, na tādisaṃ padaṃ hoti seyyathā'pi gunnaṃ.	
His colour is not like that of the cows, his sound is not like that of the cows, his footprint is not like that of the cows. 	
				
AN 4.49 anattani, bhikkhave, attāti saññāvipallāso cittavipallāso diṭṭhivipallāso.	
"In regard to what is not (a) self, "(This is) self". (is) the distortion of perception, the distortion of thought, the distortion of view.	

 
Class 19 Exercises 
1.	seyyathā'pi, mahārāja, puriso iṇaṃ ādāya kamm'ante payojeyya. tassa te kamm'antā samijjheyyuṃ. DN 2.19
Imagine if, o great king, a man taking [out] a loan would engage in work. And these activities of his would succeed. 
2.	$ sāvatthinidānaṃ. ekam'antaṃ ṭhitā kho sā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi. SN 1.13
[This] took place at Sāvatthi.  That deity stood to one side in the presence of the Blessed One, [and] then spoke this verse.
3.	% akuppā cetovimutti - etad'attham'idaṃ, brāhmaṇa, brahmacariyaṃ MN 30
Unshakable mental liberation, brahmin, - this holy life [has] that as a goal. 
4.	$ kīva dūr’ev’ime, bhikkhave, moghapurisā apakkantā imamhā dhammavinayā. MN 70
Just how far are these foolish men who have departed from this doctrine and discipline?
5.	cha’y’ime, bhikkhave, dhammā sāraṇīyā piyakaraṇā garukaraṇā saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattanti. MN 48
[There are] these six qualities to be desired, monks,  creating affection and respect, lead to mutual assistance, harmony, concord and unity.
6.	puggalo āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭh’eva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati AN 3.24
With the exhaustion of the taints, an individual, having personally experienced in this life directly knowing by himself the liberation of the mind without taints, liberation by wisdom, dwells having reached [this state].
7.	$ ye te bhikkhū app'icchā santuṭṭhā lajjino kukkuccakā sikkhākāmā te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti VIN 1.1.2 
Those monks who are of few wishes, content, conscientious, scrupulous, [and] desiring training, find fault, criticise and discuss widely [about Venerable Dhaniya]. (source text uses past tense )
8.	% vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. DN 22.18
With the settling of thoughts and examinations, [by gaining] settled assurance internally and singleness of mind, and having entered the second state of deep meditative calm, [which is ] free from thinking, free from examining, [and with] joy and happiness born from being collected, he dwells. 
9.	alam’eva saddhāpabbajitena kulaputtena vīriyaṃ ārabhituṃ SN 12.22
It is quite enough for a respectable young man who ordained out of confidence to undertake the effort. (lit: it is enough to undertake the effort by a respectable young man…)
10.	sat'ādhipateyyā sabbe dhammā, paññ'uttarā sabbe dhammā, vimuttisārā sabbe dhammā, amat'ogadhā sabbe dhammā, nibbānapariyosānā sabbe dhammā'ti AN 10.58
“All things are governed by mindfulness, all things have understanding as (their) highest, all things have liberation as [their] core, all things are plunged into the deathless, all things are culminating in extinguishment.” 
11.	ayaṃ paṭhamo puññ'ābhisando kusal'ābhisando sukhass'āhāro. SN 55.31
This is the first outflow of merit, [the first] outflow of wholesome, [which is] a cause (or nutriment) for comfort.

Class 19 Tipiṭaka Examples

MN 10.3 samudayadhammānupassī vā kāyasmiṃ viharati, vayadhammānupassī vā kāyasmiṃ viharati, samudayavayadhammānupassī vā kāyasmiṃ viharati.
He remains in the body observing arising phenomena, he remains in the body observing disappearing phenomena, he remains in the body observing arising and disappearing phenomena.
(or)
He remains observing in the body arising phenomena, he remains observing  in the body disappearing phenomena, he remains observing  in the body arising and disappearing phenomena.	
	
% MN 18 yaṃ papañceti tatonidānaṃ purisaṃ papañcasaññāsaṅkhā samudācaranti atītānāgatapaccuppannesu cakkhuviññeyyesu rūpesu.
Whatever he proliferates about, because of that proliferations, perceptions, and concepts regarding forms perceivable by the eye in the past, future, and present overwhelm a man	
	
MN 33  idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye desiyamāne na labhati atthavedaṃ, na labhati dhammavedaṃ, na labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ.
Monks, in this case, when the doctrine and discipline declared by the Buddha is being preached, monk does not get inspiration from the meaning, he does not get inspiration from the teaching, he does not get the happiness connected with the teaching. 	
	
SN 20.7 ye te suttantā tathāgatabhāsitā gambhīrā gambhīratthā lokuttarā suññatāpaṭisaṃyuttā tesu bhaññamānesu na sussūsanti.
There are those discourses preached by the Such Become One that are deep, with profound meaning, world transcending, concerned with emptiness. When they are being preached, they do not wish to listen. 	
				
AN 3.125 imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne sahassī lokadhātu akampitthāti.
“And when this explanation was being spoken, the one-thousand-world system shook.”	
				
AN 5.157 dussīlo, bhikkhave, sīlakathāya kacchamānāya abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti.
When talk about morality is being spoken, an immoral person curses, gets angry and is obstinate; he displays anger, ill will and outrage. 	
				
AN 6.62 seyyathāpi vā panānanda, rattiyā paccūsasamayaṃ sūriye uggacchante, jāneyyāsi tvaṃ, ānanda, andhakāro antaradhāyissati, āloko pātubhavissatī”ti?
Just like Ananda, in the early dawn time of night, when the sun is rising, you would know, Ananda, “Darkness will disappear (and) light will appear.”	
				
UD 45  tatiyampi kho āyasmā ānando abhikkantāya rattiyā, nikkhante pacchime yāme, uddhaste aruṇe, nandimukhiyā rattiyā uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca.
And then for the third time, when the night had progressed, when the final watch had passed, when dawn had risen and the night had a cheerful face, Venerable Ananda rose from his seat, adjusted his robe on one shoulder, stretched out his palms together towards the Blessed One, and said this to the Blessed One
				
