Class 18 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 10
Pali: yāvatatiyañ'ce samanubhāsiyamāno taṃ paṭinissajjeyya, icc'etaṃ kusalaṃ, no ce paṭinissajjeyya, saṅghādiseso.
English Translation: If, being admonished up to the third time, he should relinquish that, thus this [is] good; [but] if he should not relinquish [it], [this is a case] relating to the community in the beginning and in the end.

2. Sutta Number: SNP58
Pali: ye kec'ime isayo manujā, (icc'āyasmā puṇṇako) 
English Translation: Whichever of these human beings [are] seers. (Thus said venerable Puṇṇaka)

3. Sutta Number: SN35.247
Pali: idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā piyarūpe rūpe n'ādhimuccati, appiyarūpe rūpe na byāpajjati, upaṭṭhitakāyassati ca viharati appamāṇacetaso
English Translation: Here, monks, having seen a form with the eye, a monk is not drawn to a pleasing form, and he is not repelled by an unpleasant form; with mindfulness of the body present, he dwells with an immeasurable mind.

4. Sutta Number: DN16.32
Pali: cattāro'me, bhikkhave, acchariyā abbhutā dhammā raññe cakkavattimhi. katame cattāro?
English Translation: Monks, [there are] these four wonderful, extraordinary qualities about a wheel-turning monarch. Which four?

5. Sutta Number: AN5.51 
Pali: byāpādo, bhikkhave, āvaraṇo nīvaraṇo cetaso ajjhāruho paññāya dubbalīkaraṇo.
English Translation: Monks, ill will is an obstruction, a hindrance of the mind, which overwhelms and weakens understanding. 

6. Sutta Number: SNP54 
Pali: theyyaṃ na kāre na musā bhaṇeyya,
mettāya phasse tasathāvarāni,
yadāvilattaṃ manaso vijaññā,
kaṇhassa pakkho'ti vinodayeyya.
English Translation: One should not perform theft,
One should not speak falsely,
One should touch unstable and firm beings with kindness,
One should know any disturbance of mind and dispel it as “a flank of the 
Dark One.”

7. Sutta Number: AN8.2
Pali: tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā.
English Translation: Teachings of such quality are well-learned by him, remembered, verbally practised, mentally reflected upon, and thoroughly understood by view.

8. Sutta Number: DN22.6
Pali: puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu imameva kāyaṃ yathāṭhitaṃ yathāpaṇihitaṃ dhātuso paccavekkhati, atthi imasmiṃ kāye pathavīdhātu āpodhātu tejodhātu vāyodhātū'ti.
English Translation: And further, monks, a monk regards this body, as it is positioned, as it is directed, as elemental states. “In this very body there is the solid state, the liquid state, the fire state and the air state.”

9. Sutta Number: DHP160
Pali: attā hi attano nātho,
ko hi nātho paro siyā,
attanā hi sudantena,
nāthaṃ labhati dullabhaṃ.
English Translation: One is truly one's own protector,
How could another be (one's) protector?
With oneself truly well-tamed
one obtains a protector that is hard to get. 

10. Sutta Number: SN22.1
Pali: na rūpaṃ attato samanupassati, na rūpavantaṃ vā attānaṃ; na attani vā rūpaṃ, na rūpasmiṃ vā attānaṃ. ahaṃ rūpaṃ, mama rūpan'ti na pariyuṭṭhaṭṭhāyī hoti.
English Translation: He does not consider physical form as the self, or the self as having physical form, or physical form as in the self, or the self as in physical form. He does not remain obsessed (by the idea) “I am physical form, physical form is mine.”

11. Sutta Number: AN2.40
Pali: yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye rājāno balavanto honti, corā tasmiṃ samaye dubbalā honti. tasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye rañño phāsu hoti atiyātuṃ vā niyyātuṃ vā paccantime vā janapade anusaññātuṃ.
English Translation: At whichever time kings are strong, robbers are weak. At that time it is easy for the king to re-enter or to go out and to visit the outlying districts. 

12. Sutta Number: AN3.83
Pali: tassa na tādiso vaṇṇo hoti seyyathā'pi gunnaṃ, na tādiso saro hoti seyyathā'pi gunnaṃ, na tādisaṃ padaṃ hoti seyyathā'pi gunnaṃ.
English Translation: His colour is not like that of the cows, his sound is not like that of the cows, his footprint is not like that of the cows. 

13. Sutta Number: AN4.49
Pali: anattani, bhikkhave, attāti saññāvipallāso cittavipallāso diṭṭhivipallāso.
English Translation: "In regard to what is not (a) self, "(This is) self". (is) the distortion of perception, the distortion of thought, the distortion of view.

Class 18 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 57
Pali: tatth'āyaṃ samayo diyaḍḍho māso seso gimhānan'ti vassānassa paṭhamo māso icc'ete aḍḍhateyyamāsā
English Translation: This (is) the time in this case: One-and-a-half months (are) remaining of the hot season and the first month of the rainy season, thus these two-and-a-half months, ...

2. Sutta Number: AN5.140
Pali: idha, bhikkhave, rañño nāgo yam'enaṃ hatthidammasārathi kāraṇaṃ kāreti, yadi vā katapubbaṃ yadi vā akatapubbaṃ, taṃ aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasi katvā sabbaṃ cetasā samannāharitvā ohitasoto suṇāti. 
English Translation: Here, monks, a king's bull elephant to whichever task the elephant trainer has him perform, whether [it] has been previously done or not previously done, having focused and paid attention on that (task), having concentrated completely with the mind, he listens with applied ear.

3. Sutta Number: AN3.71
Pali: gopālako sāyanhasamaye sāmikānaṃ gāvo niyyātetvā iti paṭisañcikkhati: "ajja kho gāvo amukasmiñ'ca amukasmiñ'ca padese cariṃsu" 
English Translation: In the evening, a young cowherd, having handed over the cattle to the owners, reflects thus: “Today, indeed, the cattle grazed in this place and in that place…”

4. Sutta Number: SN7.9
Pali: māno hi te brāhmaṇa khāribhāro, kodho dhūmo bhasmani mosavajjaṃ
English Translation: Conceit, O brahmin, is indeed the burden carried across your shoulders; anger the smoke, false speech (is in) the ashes.

5. Sutta Number: AN3.51
Pali: idha, bhikkhave, mahācoro rājānaṃ vā rājamahāmattānaṃ vā nissito hoti.
English Translation: Here, monks, a master thief is dependent on kings or the royal ministers.

6. Sutta Number: MN82
Pali: app'ekad'āhaṃ, bho raṭṭhapāla, idha pādaṃ karissāmī'ti aññen'eva pādaṃ karomī"ti. 
English Translation: “Just sometimes, master Raṭṭhapāla, thinking, "I will place the foot here", I place it at (lit.: with) another (place).”