Class 23 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: AN4.198
Pali: so navaṃ santh'āgāraṃ pavisati, saddhiṃ mahesiyā brāhmaṇena ca purohitena.
English Translation: He enters the new meeting hall together with the royal consort and the chief brahmin priest.

2. Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 68
Pali: mā, āyasmā, evaṃ avaca. mā bhagavantaṃ abbhācikkhi, na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhānaṃ, na hi bhagavā evaṃ vadeyya.
English Translation: Venerable, do not say so. Do not misrepresent the Blessed One. Misrepresenting the Blessed One [is] not good. The Blessed One would not speak in this way.

3. Sutta Number: AN4.61
Pali: idha, gahapati, ariyasāvako vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati muttacāgo payatapāṇi vossaggarato yācayogo dānasaṃvibhāgarato. ayaṃ vuccati, gahapati, cāgasampadā.
English Translation: Here, householder, the master of the house [who is] a noble disciple lives the household life with a mind free from the stain of stinginess, giving freely, open-handed, delighting in generosity, ready to give to beggars, and who delights in sharing gifts. This, householder, is called the attainment of generosity.

4. Sutta Number: SNP13
Pali: khayaṃ virāgaṃ amataṃ paṇītaṃ, 
yad'ajjhagā sakyamunī samāhito. 
na tena dhammena sam'atthi kiñci
English Translation: Wearing away, dispassion, the superior deathless state – whatever the Sakyan sage, concentrated, obtained; there is not anything equal to that doctrine.

5. Sutta Number: DHP191
Pali: (passati) dukkhaṃ dukkhasamuppādaṃ, dukkhassa ca atikkamaṃ, ariyañ'c'aṭṭh'aṅgikaṃ maggaṃ, dukkh'ūpasamagāminaṃ.
English Translation: [one sees the four noble truths with right understanding:] suffering, the origin of suffering, the overcoming of suffering, and the noble eightfold path leading to release from suffering.

6. Sutta Number: SNP8
Pali: santussako ca subharo ca, appakicco ca sallahukavutti, 
sant'indriyo ca nipako ca, appagabbho kulesu ananugiddho.
English Translation: One who is satisfied and easy to support, with few obligations and whose livelihood is frugal; one whose (mental) faculties are calm and who is discerning, courteous among families and not greedy.

7. Sutta Number: TH257
Pali: araññe rukkhamūlesu, kandarāsu guhāsu ca.
vivekam'anubrūhantā, vihaṃsu tap'parāyanā
English Translation: They lived in the forest, at the bases of trees, in grottoes and in caves, fostering seclusion, with that as [their] final goal.

8. Sutta Number: SN12.22
Pali: dukkhaṃ, bhikkhave, kusīto viharati vokiṇṇo pāpakehi akusalehi dhammehi, mahantañ'ca sadatthaṃ parihāpeti.
English Translation: He [who is] lazy dwells in suffering, mingled with evil and unskillful things, and [one who] greatly neglects his own benefit.

9. Sutta Number: VIN5.4.7
Pali: yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṃ, saṅgho imaṃ adhikaraṇaṃ tiṇavatthārakena vūpasameyya, ṭhapetvā thullavajjaṃ, ṭhapetvā gihippaṭisaṃyuttan'ti.
English Translation: If it is a suitable time for the community, the community may settle this dispute by covering it with grass, apart from serious offences and those connected with lay people.

10. Sutta Number: AN6.46
Pali: idh'āvuso, dhammayogā bhikkhū jhāyī bhikkhū apasādenti, ime pana jhāyino'mhā, jhāyino'mhā'ti jhāyanti pajjhāyanti nijjhāyanti avajjhāyanti.
English Translation: Here friends, the monks devoted to the teaching belittle the meditator monks (saying), “These (monks say) ‘We are meditators, we are meditators!” but they meditate, over-meditate, under-meditate, mis-meditate.”

11. Sutta Number: SNP53
Pali: yodha kāme accatari,
saṅgaṃ loke duraccayaṃ,
na so socati nājjheti,
chinnasoto abandhano.
English Translation: Whoever here has escaped sensual pleasures,
an attachment to the world hard to overcome,
he does not sorrow, he is not anxious,
(he has) cut the stream, (he is) free.

12. Sutta Number: DN16.27
Pali: sabbaphāliphullā kho, ānanda, yamakasālā akālapupphehi. te tathāgatassa sarīraṃ okiranti ajjhokiranti abhippakiranti tathāgatassa pūjāya.
English Translation: Ananda, this pair of Sal tress is in full blossom with out of season flowers. They rain down, scatter down, completely cover the body of the Tathagata, in worship of the Tathagata.

13. Sutta Number: AN5.23
Pali: so sace ākaṅkhati, anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhaveyyaṃ, eko'pi hutvā bahudhā assaṃ, bahudhā'pi hutvā eko assaṃ, āvibhāvaṃ tirobhāvaṃ
English Translation: If he wishes, “I could manifest various kinds of psychic power. Having been one I could become many, having been many I could become one. (I could) appear and disappear.”

14. Sutta Number: MN61
Pali: sace tvaṃ, rāhula, paccavekkhamāno evaṃ jāneyyāsi, yaṃ kho ahaṃ idaṃ kāyena kammaṃ kattukāmo idaṃ me kāyakammaṃ attabyābādhāya'pi saṃvatteyya
English Translation: If you know this while reflecting, “Whichever action that I wish to do by body, that physical action could lead to harm to myself” ...

Class 23 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: MN20
Pali: seyyathā'pi, bhikkhave, balavā puriso dubbalataraṃ purisaṃ sīse vā gale vā khandhe vā gahetvā abhiniggaṇheyya abhinippīḷeyya abhisantāpeyya
English Translation: Just as a powerful man, having seized a weaker man on the head or neck or shoulder, might firmly grab hold of [him] [and] completely crush [him] down, [and] torture [him]....

2. Sutta Number: TH251
Pali: passāmi loke sadhane manusse, laddhāna vittaṃ na dadanti mohā. 
luddhā dhanaṃ sannicayaṃ karonti, bhiyyo'va kāme abhipatthayanti.
English Translation: I see wealthy persons in the world; having obtained wealth, they do not donate [it], because of delusion. [And] because of greed, they make a stockpile [of] wealth; they crave even more sensual pleasures

3. Sutta Number: SN46.3
Pali: savanampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ bahukāraṃ vadāmi; upasaṅkamanampāhaṃ … payirupāsanampāhaṃ … anussatimpāhaṃ … anupabbajjampāhaṃ
English Translation: Just hearing of those monks, just approaching [them], just attending closely to [them], just recollecting [them], just following [them] into the monastic life, is very helpful I say.

4. Sutta Number: AN7.67
Pali: seyyathā'pi rañño paccantime nagare anupariyāyapatho hoti ucco c'eva vitthato ca, evam'evaṃ kho, ariyasāvako ottappī hoti, ottappati kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena
English Translation: Just as the encircling path around the frontier fortress of the king is high and even broad [for protecting its inhabitants]; in the same way, indeed, a 
noble disciple is afraid of doing wrong and feels conscience about bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.


5. Sutta Number: SN1.28
Pali: aññam'aññ'ābhigijjhanti,
kāmesu analaṅ'katā.
English Translation: They are jealous of each other; they are insatiable in regard to sensual pleasures.

6. Sutta Number: SNP13
Pali: yān'īdha bhūtāni samāgatāni,  bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe. 
sabb'eva bhūtā sumanā bhavantu,  atho'pi sakkacca suṇantu bhāsitaṃ.
English Translation: Whichever living beings gathered here, earthly or in the sky: may all living beings be happy and then let them respectfully listen to what is said ([this] utterance).

7. Sutta Number: VIN PAT SK 26
Pali: na pallatthikāya antaraghare nisīdissāmī'ti sikkhā karaṇīyā.
English Translation: “I will not sit  with the knees clasped around in an inhabited area.” The training is to be done.

8. Sutta Number: SN22.22
Pali: nikkhipitvā garuṃ bhāraṃ, aññaṃ bhāraṃ anādiya. samūlaṃ taṇham'abbuyha, nicchāto parinibbuto”ti.
English Translation: “Having placed down the onerous burden [and] not taking up another burden, pulling out craving with the root, he is desireless (without being hungry), entirely liberated.”

9. Sutta Number: SN20.10
Pali: atha kho so, bhikkhave, mudumūsi gocarāya pakkāmi. tam'enaṃ biḷāro gahetvā sahasā asaṅkhāditvā ajjhohari. tassa so mudumūsi antam'pi khādi, antaguṇam'pi khādi.
English Translation: Then, monks, that soft mouse set out for food. A cat grabbed it, and quickly swallowed it without chewing. That soft mouse ate the cat's intestines and it's mesentery.

10. Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā mā nimittaggāhino ahuvattha, mā anubyañjanaggāhino. yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ.
English Translation: Having seen a form with the eye, don't grasp the image or the other features. 
On account of which greed and grief, evil, unwholesome states, would flow upon him dwelling with an unrestrained faculty of sight.

11. Sutta Number: SN22.26
Pali: yāvakīvañ'c'āhaṃ, bhikkhave, imesaṃ pañcannaṃ upādānakkhandhānaṃ evaṃ assādañ'ca assādato ādīnavañ'ca ādīnavato nissaraṇañ'ca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ n'ābbhaññāsiṃ, neva tāv'āhaṃ, bhikkhave ... anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho'ti paccaññāsiṃ
English Translation: Monks, as long as I did not know the satisfaction of these five aggregates which are grasped to as satisfaction, the danger as the danger, and the escape as the escape,... I did not claim full realisation of enlightenment, “(I have) realised enlightenment”.