Class 28 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: KHP5
Pali: gāravo ca nivāto ca,
santuṭṭhi ca kataññutā,
kālena dhammassavanaṃ,
etaṃ maṅgalam'uttamaṃ.
English Translation: Reverence and humility, satisfaction and gratitude, Hearing the teaching at the right time; this is the highest blessing.

2. Sutta Number: SN1.51
Pali: sīlaṃ yāva jarā sādhu,
saddhā sādhu patiṭṭhitā,
paññā narānaṃ ratanaṃ,
puññaṃ corehi dūharan'ti.
English Translation: “Virtue up to old age [is] good; faith [that is] established [is] good; wisdom [is] the jewel of humans; merit [is] hard for thieves to steal.”

3. Sutta Number: MN22
Pali: idha, bhikkhave, ekacce moghapurisā dhammaṃ pariyāpuṇanti, suttaṃ, geyyaṃ, veyyākaraṇaṃ, gāthaṃ, udānaṃ, itivuttakaṃ, jātakaṃ, abbhutadhammaṃ, vedallaṃ.
English Translation: Here, monks, some foolish persons study well the teaching – discourses, mixed verses, detailed expositions, poems, inspired sayings, quotations, birth stories, marvellous accounts, questions-and-answers…

4. Sutta Number: THI71
Pali: madhurañ'ca pavanti sabbaso,
kusumarajena samuṭṭhitā dumā,
paṭhamavasanto sukho utu,
ehi ramāma supupphite vane. 
English Translation: The trees laden with pollen exude a sweet smell all around by means of flower pollen; the first month of the season, spring, [is] pleasant; come! Let us take delight in the wood abounding in blossoms.

5. Sutta Number: AN5.36
Pali: āgantukassa dānaṃ deti, gamikassa dānaṃ deti, gilānassa dānaṃ deti, dubbhikkhe dānaṃ deti.
English Translation: One gives to a newcomer, one gives to a traveller, one gives to one who is ill, one gives when famine.

6. Sutta Number: SN2.23
Pali: tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, catūsu dvāresu dānaṃ dīyittha samaṇa-brāhmaṇa-kapaṇ'addhika-vanibbaka-yācakānaṃ.
English Translation: Thus, my gifts were offered at the four gates to ascetics, brahmins, tramps and travellers, mendicants and beggars.

7. Sutta Number: MN49
Pali: eso hi, bhikkhu, brahmā mahābrahmā abhibhū anabhibhūto añña'd'atthudaso vasavattī issaro kattā nimmātā seṭṭho sajitā vasī pitā bhūtabhabyānaṃ.
English Translation: Indeed, monk, this is Brahmā, great god almighty, supreme being, unvanquished, all seeing, wielding power, god, creator, designer, foremost assigner, master [and] father for those who are and who will be.

8. Sutta Number: AN5.36
Pali: ye tattha anumodanti,
veyyāvaccaṃ karonti vā,
na tena dakkhiṇā ūnā,
te'pi puññassa bhāgino.
English Translation: [Given with a clear mind, one's offering is vast]; they who are pleased in that regard or do service, by means of that are not lacking the offering; they, too, partake in the merit. 

9. Sutta Number: MN12
Pali: sotatto sosinno c'eva,
eko bhiṃsanake vane,
naggo na c'aggim'āsīno,
esanāpasuto munī'ti.
English Translation: “Scorched, freezing, alone in a frightening grove, naked and not seated [next to] a fire, the sage is devoted to the quest.”

10. Sutta Number: TH133
Pali: accayanti ahorattā,
jīvitaṃ uparujjhati,
āyu khīyati maccānaṃ,
kunnadīnaṃ'va odakaṃ.
English Translation: Days and nights fly past, life is finished. The life of mortal men is exhausted like the water of small streams.

11. Sutta Number: MN131
Pali: evaṃ vihārim'ātāpiṃ, ahorattam'atanditaṃ. 
taṃ ve bhadd'ekaratto'ti, santo ācikkhate muni.
English Translation: “Living thus ardently, tirelessly throughout the day and night, energetic – it is, indeed, he, who the peaceful sage describes having a single auspicious night.”

12. Sutta Number: SN46.3
Pali: samādhisambojjh'aṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati. so tathāsamāhitaṃ cittaṃ sādhukaṃ ajjhupekkhitā hoti.
English Translation: On that occasion, concentration as a factor of enlightenment comes to full development for a monk by meditation;[he is] one who looks well with equanimity on the thus composed mind.

13. Sutta Number: AN7.61
Pali: no ce te evaṃ viharato taṃ middhaṃ pahīyetha tato tvaṃ, moggallāna, ubho kaṇṇasotāni āviñjeyyāsi pāṇinā gattāni anumajjeyyāsi
English Translation: If that drowsiness could not be abandoned when you're dwelling in such a way, then you, Moggallāna, should pull both ear holes [and] you should rub [your] limbs with your hands.

14. Sutta Number: SNP51
Pali: sa sabbadhammesu visenibhūto,
yaṃ kiñci diṭṭhaṃ va sutaṃ mutaṃ vā,
sa pannabhāro muni vippamutto,
na kappiyo n'ūparato na patthiyo'ti.
English Translation: “He, not opposing all things he has become, anything whatever that has been seen or heard or perceived, the sage who has laid down the load is freed, not stopped, not desiring.”

15. Sutta Number: ITI76
Pali: sīlaṃ rakkheyya medhāvī,
patthayāno tayo sukhe,
pasaṃsaṃ vittalābhañ'ca,
pecca sagge pamodanaṃ.
English Translation: The intelligent man should protect virtue, aspiring for three pleasures: praise, the gaining of wealth, and after death delighting in heaven [realms].

16. Sutta Number: SN1.49
Pali: sace enti manussattaṃ,
dalidde jāyare kule,
coḷaṃ piṇḍo ratī khiḍḍā,
yattha kicchena labbhati.
English Translation: If they (i.e. stingy people) come [back] to a human state, they are born in a poor family, where clothing, a bit of food, pleasure, [and] entertainment are obtained with difficulty.

17. Sutta Number: DHP326
Pali: idaṃ pure cittam'acāri cārikaṃ,
yen'icchakaṃ yatthakāmaṃ yathāsukhaṃ,
tadajj'ahaṃ niggahessāmi yoniso,
hatthippabhinnaṃ viya aṅkusaggaho.
English Translation: Formerly this mind wandered around on a walking tour wherever it liked, according to its pleasure, because of wanting, but now I will restrain [it] thoroughly like an elephant driver holding a hooked pole to an elephant in rut (i.e. with juices flowing).

18. Sutta Number: TH251
Pali: aṭṭhapadakatā kesā, nettā añjanamakkhitā. 
alaṃ bālassa mohāya, no ca pāragavesino.
English Translation: Head hair plaited eightfold, eyes smeared with eye ointment. It is enough for the delusion of a fool, but not for those seeking the far shore