Class 25 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: SN56.11
Pali: cātummahārājikānaṃ devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā tāvatiṃsā devā saddam'anussāvesuṃ
English Translation: Having heard the sound of the deities belonging to the Four Great Kings the deities belonging to the (Heaven of the) Thirty Three proclaimed aloud.

2. Sutta Number: TH257
Pali: tato pāsādikaṃ āsi, gataṃ bhuttaṃ nisevitaṃ.
siniddhā teladhārā'va, ahosi iriyāpatho.
English Translation: Therefore (their) walking, eating and practice was inspiring confidence, (their) deportment was as smooth as a stream of oil.

3. Sutta Number: MN51
Pali: yā sā vācā nelā kaṇṇasukhā pemanīyā hadayaṅ'gamā porī bahujanakantā bahujanamanāpā tathārūpiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti
English Translation: He is a speaker of such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and lovable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many and agreeable to many.

4. Sutta Number: AN10.48
Pali: vevaṇṇiy'amhi ajjhupagato'ti, pabbajitena abhiṇhaṃ paccavekkhitabbaṃ
English Translation: “I have come to a change of social order”, should be frequently reflected on by a renunciant.

5. Sutta Number: SN46.3
Pali: tathārūpānaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ dhammaṃ sutvā dvayena vūpakāsena vūpakaṭṭho viharati, kāyavūpakāsena ca cittavūpakāsena ca.
English Translation: Monks, [when] one has heard the doctrine from (lit: of) monks of such quality, he dwells in seclusion, withdrawn by means of two ways: bodily seclusion and mental seclusion.

6. Sutta Number: DN2.4
Pali: kusāvatiyā, ānanda, rājadhāniyā catunnaṃ vaṇṇānaṃ dvārāni ahesuṃ. ekaṃ dvāraṃ sovaṇṇamayaṃ, ekaṃ rūpiyamayaṃ, ekaṃ veḷuriyamayaṃ, ekaṃ phalikamayaṃ.
English Translation: Ānanda, in Kusāvatī the royal capital, there were four gates of four colours, one made of gold, another of silver, another of cat's eye and another of crystals.

7. Sutta Number: DN16.11
Pali: dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti, svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opanayiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhī'ti
English Translation: He has absolute faith in the teaching, “The teaching is well taught by the Blessed One, it is visible, timeless, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”

8. Sutta Number: MN39
Pali: samit'āssa honti pāpakā akusalā dhammā saṃkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā
English Translation: His evil unwholesome mental states are settled, (mental states which are) defiling, leading to rebirth, troublesome, having painful consequences and leading to birth, old age and death.

9. Sutta Number: AN10.44
Pali: tassa bhavanti vattāro, iṅgha tāva āyasmā vācasikaṃ sikkhassū'ti, iti'ssa bhavanti vattāro.
English Translation: There are those who (will) say to him, “Come on, Venerable, at least you must train yourself in verbal conduct.”

10. Sutta Number: AN7.61
Pali: viggāhikāya moggallāna kathāya sati kathābāhullaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ
English Translation: When there is argumentative talk, Moggallana, then an excess of talk is to be expected.

11. Sutta Number: SN16.10
Pali: atha kho āyasmā mahākassapo āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etad'avoca, kiṃ nu kho, āvuso ānanda, ahaṃ sūcivāṇijako, tvaṃ sūcikāro, udāhu ahaṃ sūcikāro, tvaṃ sūcivāṇijako'ti?
English Translation: Then the great venerable Kassapa said this to venerable Ananda, “Am I the needle peddler and you are the needle maker? Or am I the needle maker and you are the needle peddler?”

12. Sutta Number: ITI100
Pali: tassa me tumhe puttā orasā mukhato jātā dhammajā dhammanimmitā dhammadāyādā, no āmisadāyādā.
English Translation: You all are my legitimate sons, born from my mouth, born from the Dhamma, created by the Dhamma, inheritors of the Dhamma, not inheritor of worldly things.

13. Sutta Number: SN35.241
Pali: evam'eva kho, bhikkhave, sace tumhe'pi na orimaṃ tīraṃ upagacchatha, na pārimaṃ tīraṃ upagacchatha, na majjhe saṃsīdissatha, na thale ussīdissatha
English Translation: Similarly, monks, if you don't veer towards the near bank, nor veer towards the far bank, nor sink down in the middle, nor wash up on dry land ...

Class 25 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 59
Pali: yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā sikkhamānāya vā sāmaṇerassa vā sāmaṇeriyā vā sāmaṃ cīvaraṃ vikappetvā appaccuddhāraṇaṃ paribhuñjeyya, pācittiyaṃ.
English Translation: Whatever Bhikkhu, having himself assigned a robe to a monk, a nun, a male novice or a female novice, should use (it) without withdrawing (the assignment), (there is) an offence requiring confession.

2. Sutta Number: AN6.17
Pali: indriyesu guttadvārā bhavissāma, bhojane mattaññuno, jāgariyaṃ anuyuttā, vipassakā kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ, pubbaratt'āpararattaṃ bodhipakkhiyānaṃ dhammānaṃ, bhāvanā'nuyogam'anuyuttā viharissāmā'ti.
English Translation: “We will be guarded regarding the sense faculties, knowing the correct measure in regard to food, devoted to wakefulness, [and] having clear insight of wholesome qualities, we will dwell devoting ourselves to mental cultivation, developing day and night the aids leading to enlightenment.”

3. Sutta Number: MN50
Pali: bhūtapubb'āhaṃ, pāpima, dūsī nāma māro ahosiṃ, tassa me kāḷī nāma bhaginī. tassā tvaṃ putto. so me tvaṃ bhāgineyyo ahosi.
English Translation: Formerly, evil one, I was Mara (Death), by the name of dūsī (corrupter), [and] I had a sister by the name of kāḷī. You [were] her son, you were my nephew.

4. Sutta Number: MN51
Pali: atha kho pesso ca hatth'ārohaputto kandarako ca paribbājako yena bhagavā ten'upasaṅkamiṃsu
English Translation: After that, Pessa, the son of an elephant rider, and Kandaraka, a wandering ascetic, approached the Blessed One.

5. Sutta Number: DN3.13
Pali: aho vata re amhākaṃ paṇḍitaka, aho vata re amhākaṃ bahussutaka, aho vata re amhākaṃ tevijjaka
English Translation: (Sarcastically) Oh, our wise man! Oh, our great scholar! Oh, our master of the three vedas!

6. Sutta Number: DHP295
Pali: mātaraṃ pitaraṃ hantvā,
rājāno dve ca sotthiye,
veyagghapañcamaṃ hantvā,
anīgho yāti brāhmaṇo.
English Translation: Having killed mother and father,
two learned kings,
and a tiger as the fifth,
the Brahman wanders untroubled.