Class 21 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: SNP13
Pali: yaṃ buddhaseṭṭho parivaṇṇayī suciṃ, samādhim'ānantarikañ'ñam'āhu.
English Translation: The foremost Buddha extolled pure stillness of the mind, which they say with immediate results.

2. Sutta Number: SNP13
Pali: khayaṃ virāgaṃ amataṃ paṇītaṃ, yad'ajjhagā sakyamunī samāhito.
English Translation: The wearing away, the dispassion, the deathless, the sublime (or sublime deathless) which the concentrated Sakyan sage attained…

3. Sutta Number: SNP22
Pali: khaṇo vo mā upaccagā, khaṇ'ātītā hi socanti, nirayamhi samappitā.
English Translation: Don't let the opportunity pass by; they who have missed the chance are consigned to hell [and] sorrow over [it].

4. Sutta Number: AN4.67
Pali: sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā, sabbe bhūtā ca kevalā.  
sabbe bhadrāni passantu, mā kiñci pāpam'āgamā.
English Translation: May all creatures, all living beings, all existing entities, all of them, may they all encounter good fortune and may not any evil come to (them).

5. Sutta Number: SNP41
Pali: yo attano sīlavatāni jantu, anānupuṭṭho'va paresa pāva, anariyadhammaṃ kusalā tam'āhu, yo ātumānaṃ sayam'eva pāva.
English Translation: A person who, unasked, boasts to others about his virtues and practices, the skillful ones call him [one of] ignoble nature, who boasts about himself just on his own accord.

6. Sutta Number: MN79
Pali: appevanām'imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā'ti
English Translation: “If only the destruction of this whole mass of suffering would be apparent. (lit. make itself known)”

7. Sutta Number: AN10.44
Pali: "iṅgha tāva āyasmā kāyikaṃ sikkhassū"ti, iti'ssa bhavanti vattāro.
English Translation: “Please, Venerable, first you must train yourself bodily”; there are those who speak thus to him.

8. Sutta Number: SNP70
Pali: evaṃ abhikkantadassāviṃ, atthi pañhena āgamaṃ, 
kathaṃ lokaṃ avekkhantaṃ, maccurājā na passati.
English Translation: I myself, a seeker, have come to [the one] of such excellent vision, with a question. How is one viewing the world [and] the king of death does not see [him]?

9. Sutta Number: SN1.31
Pali: sabbhireva samāsetha,
sabbhi kubbetha santhavaṃ,
sataṃ saddhammamaññāya,
sattā gacchanti suggatin'ti.
English Translation: One should associate oneself just with the virtuous,
with the virtuous, one should be intimate,
having understood the true teaching of the virtuous,
beings go (on) to a good destination.

10. Sutta Number: UD5.10
Pali: ṭhitena kāyena ṭhitena cetasā,
tiṭṭhaṃ nisinno uda vā sayāno,
etaṃ satiṃ bhikkhu adhiṭṭhahāno,
labhetha pubbāpariyaṃ visesaṃ,
laddhāna pubbāpariyaṃ visesaṃ,
adassanaṃ maccurājassa gacche'ti.
English Translation: With stationary body, with stationary mind, 
standing or sitting or lying down,
a monk focusing on this mindfulness,
could get successive attainments,
having obtained successive attainments,
he could go out of the king of death's sight.

11. Sutta Number: KHP9
Pali: na paro paraṃ nikubbetha,
n'ātimaññetha katthaci naṃ kiñci,
byārosanā paṭighasaññā,
nāññamaññassa dukkhamiccheyya.
English Translation: One should not cheat another, 
nor despise anywhere anyone,
out of anger and dislike, 
one should not wish suffering for another.

12. Sutta Number: AN2.19
Pali: kusalaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvetha. sakkā, bhikkhave, kusalaṃ bhāvetuṃ. no cedaṃ, bhikkhave, sakkā abhavissa kusalaṃ bhāvetuṃ, nāhaṃ evaṃ vadeyyaṃ, kusalaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvethā'ti.
English Translation: You all must develop skillful qualities (lit: the good), monks. It is possible to develop skillful qualities. If it would not be possible to develop skillful qualities, I myself would not say this, “Monks, develop skillful qualities.”

13. Sutta Number: AN3.39
Pali: ahañceva kho pana jarādhammo samāno jaraṃ anatīto paraṃ jiṇṇaṃ disvā aṭṭīyeyyaṃ harāyeyyaṃ jiguccheyyaṃ na metaṃ assa patirūpan'ti.
English Translation: “And if I, being of a nature to get old, who is not exempt from old age, would see another old person and would become troubled, ashamed and disgusted, that would not be suitable for me”.

14. Sutta Number: UD5.10
Pali: addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ cūḷapanthakaṃ avidūre nisinnaṃ pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā.
English Translation: The Blessed One saw Venerable Cūḷapanthaka seated nearby, having folded (his legs) into sitting posture, directing his body upright, having set up mindfulness to the fore.

15. Sutta Number: ITI87
Pali: tayo vitakke kusale vitakkaye,
tayo pana akusale nirākare,
sa ve vitakkāni vicāritāni,
sameti vuṭṭhīva rajaṃ samūhataṃ,
sa ve vitakkūpasamena cetasā, 
idheva so santipadaṃ samajjhagā'ti.
English Translation: One should think three skilful thoughts,
and one should reject three unskilful ones.
One stills thoughts and plans,
like the rain (stills) raised dust.
With a mind with thought calmed,
right here one has obtained that state of peace.

16. Sutta Number: SN11.24
Pali: tena kho pana samayena dve bhikkhū sampayojesuṃ, tatreko bhikkhu accasarā, atha kho so bhikkhu tassa bhikkhuno santike accayaṃ accayato deseti, so bhikkhu nappaṭiggaṇhāti.
English Translation: And at that time two monks quarreled. There, one monk transgressed. Then that monk confessed his fault to that other monk, but that monk did not accept (his apology).

Class 21 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: SN2.8
Pali: kayirā ce, kayirāth'enaṃ, daḷham'enaṃ parakkame.  
sithilo hi paribbājo, bhiyyo ākirate rajaṃ.
English Translation: If one should do (something), one should do (it) by oneself; one should undertake it vigorously. A wandering monk [who is] lax would certainly stir up for himself more dirt.

2. Sutta Number: TH251
Pali: na dīgham'āyuṃ labhate dhanena, na c'āpi vittena jaraṃ vihanti.  appaṃ h'idaṃ jīvitam'āhu dhīrā, asassataṃ vippariṇāmadhammaṃ.
English Translation: Not by means of wealth does one get oneself a long life and not even by means of possessions does one banish old age. The sages say this life is indeed short, not eternal, and having the nature of changing (i.e. is changeable in nature).

3. Sutta Number: VIN PAT NP 10
Pali: yuñjant'āyasmanto sakaṃ, mā vo sakaṃ vinassā”ti. 
English Translation: “Let the venerables regain for [what is their] own; do not [let] what is your own get lost.”

4. Sutta Number: SNP46
Pali: visenikatvā pana ye caranti,
diṭṭhīhi diṭṭhiṃ avirujjhamānā,
tesu tvaṃ kiṃ labhetho pasūra,
yesīdha natthī paramuggahītaṃ. 
English Translation: They wander around without an army, not opposing a view with views. In them, what could you get yourself, Pasura, in whom there is nothing grasped as the highest.