Class 16 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: MN48
Pali: idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno mettaṃ kāyakammaṃ paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti sabrahmacārīsu āvi c'eva raho ca.
English Translation: Here, monks, a monk has established (lit: there is established for a monk) kind bodily action(s) in regard to his spiritual companions, openly and even privately.

2. Sutta Number: SN22.63
Pali: yass'atthāya kulaputtā samma'd'eva agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajanti tad'anuttaraṃ brahmacariyapariyosānaṃ diṭṭh'eva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati.
English Translation: He dwells having reached even in this life that unsurpassed perfection of the holy life, for the purpose of which sons of respectable families rightly go forth from home to homelessness, having experienced it for himself by direct knowledge.

3. Sutta Number: MN117
Pali: iti'ss'ime tayo dhammā sammādiṭṭhiṃ anuparidhāvanti anuparivattanti, seyyath'idaṃ, sammādiṭṭhi, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati.
English Translation: Thus, for him these three states circle around, rotate around right view; that is, right view, right effort, [and] right mindfulness.

4. Sutta Number: MN21
Pali: ubhatodaṇḍakena ce'pi kakacena corā ocarakā aṅgam'aṅgāni okanteyyuṃ, tatrā'pi yo mano padūseyya, na me so tena sāsanakaro.
English Translation: Even if mean thieves should cut off [your] [limbs] limb by limb with a double-handled saw, even in that case, whoever would cause the mind to be corrupt because of that, he is not the one practising my teaching.

5. Sutta Number: SN22.59
Pali: yaṃ pan'āniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāma-dhammaṃ, kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ — etaṃ mama, eso'ham'asmi, eso me attā'ti? no h'etaṃ, bhante.
English Translation: Whatever is impermanent, suffering, and of a changing nature, is it suitable to regard that as “this [is] mine, this I am, this [is] my self”? Certainly not (lit: this indeed not), venerable sir.

6. Sutta Number: MN139
Pali: iti kho pan'etaṃ vuttaṃ. kiñ'c'etaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ?
English Translation: Thus, indeed, it has been said. And depending on what has this been said?

7. Sutta Number: MN140
Pali: tass'eva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno abhijjhā hoti chando sārāgo. sv'āssa pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tāl'āvatthukato anabhāvaṃkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo.
English Translation: Formerly, indeed, for that ignorant one, there was covetousness, desire and passion. [But now] for him that has been abandoned, it has been uprooted like a palm tree, totally annihilated, never arising again in the future.

8. Sutta Number: SNP62
Pali: santi loke munayo, janā vadanti ta'y'idaṃ kathaṃsu, ñāṇ'ūpapannaṃ no muniṃ vadanti, udāhu ve jīviten'ūpapannaṃ.
English Translation: There are sages in the world, people say, but how is that so? Do they call one a sage because of knowledge or rather because of the way of life?

9. Sutta Number: AN8.53
Pali: neso dhammo neso vinayo netaṃ satthusāsananti
English Translation: This is not the teaching, this is not the discipline, this is not the teacher's instruction.

10. Sutta Number: SN12.63
Pali: cattārome, bhikkhave, āhārā bhūtānaṃ vā sattānaṃ ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnaṃ vā anuggahāya.
English Translation: Monks, there are these four fuels for the maintenance of existing sentient beings or for the support of those seeking birth.

11. Sutta Number: AN4.45
Pali: na cāhaṃ, āvuso, appatvāva lokassa antaṃ dukkhassa antakiriyaṃ vadāmi.
English Translation: But I also say, friends, that without reaching the end of the world, (there is) no ending of suffering.

12. Sutta Number: AN2.89
Pali: dve'me, bhikkhave, dhammā. katame dve? paggāho ca avikkhepo ca.
English Translation: Monks there are these two things. What two? Effort and tranquility.

13. Sutta Number: SN22.81
Pali: ekova bhagavā tasmiṃ samaye viharitukāmo hoti na bhagavā tasmiṃ samaye kenaci anubandhitabbo hotīti
English Translation: “At that time the Buddha wishes to just live alone, at that time he should not be followed by anyone.”

14. Sutta Number: SN9.3
Pali: sacepi dasa pajjote, dhārayissasi kassapa, neva dakkhati rūpāni, cakkhu hissa na vijjatīti.
English Translation: Even if you would carry ten lamps, Kassapa, he would not see forms, because he does not have sight.

15. Sutta Number: MN95
Pali: no cetaṃ chando jāyetha, nayidaṃ ussaheyya.
English Translation: If one would not arouse intention, one would not strive.

16. Sutta Number: SN47.10
Pali: yassa khvāhaṃ atthāya cittaṃ paṇidahiṃ so me attho abhinipphanno
English Translation: The purpose for which I directed the mind has definitely been accomplished by me.

17. Sutta Number: AN5.57
Pali: maraṇadhammomhi, maraṇaṃ anatītoti abhiṇhaṃ paccavekkhitabbaṃ itthiyā vā purisena vā gahaṭṭhena vā pabbajitena vā.
English Translation: “I am of the nature to die, I have not overcome death,” should be reflected on often by a woman or a man, a householder or a renunciant.

18. Sutta Number: SNP7
Pali: ekajaṃ vā dvijaṃ vāpi, yodha pāṇaṃ vihiṃsati, yassa pāṇe dayā natthi, taṃ jaññā vasalo iti.
English Translation: Whoever here harms a living being, once born or even twice born, who has no compassion for a living being, one should know him as an “outcast”.

19. Sutta Number: MN3
Pali: yaṃnūnāhaṃ imaṃ piṇḍapātaṃ bhuñjitvā jighacchādubbalyaṃ paṭivinodetvā evaṃ imaṃ rattindivaṃ vītināmeyyanti.
English Translation: What if I were to eat this alms-food, get rid of hunger and weakness, and spend this night and day in this way.

20. Sutta Number: AN4.35
Pali: neva kho tyāhaṃ, brāhmaṇa, anumodāmi na paṭikkosāmi.
English Translation: I neither agree with you, Brahmin, nor do I disagree with you.

21. Sutta Number: DHP62
Pali: puttā matthi dhanammatthi. iti bālo vihaññati. attā hi attano natthi, kuto puttā kuto dhanaṃ.
English Translation: A fool suffers hardship, [thinking], 'I have sons, I have wealth'; He even does not own himself, let alone sons, let alone wealth. 

Class 16 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: DHP389
Pali: na brāhmaṇassa pahareyya, n'āssa muñcetha brāhmaṇo, dhī brāhmaṇassa hantāraṃ, tato dhī y'assa muñcati.
English Translation: One should not strike a brahmin, (but) a brahmin should not get angry with that one (who hits him); woe on the striker of a brahmin! More woe on him, whoever gets angry with one (who hits him)!

2. Sutta Number: MN12
Pali: abhijānāmi kho pan'āhaṃ, sāriputta, caturaṅgasamannāgataṃ brahmacariyaṃ caritā, tapassī su'daṃ homi paramatapassī
English Translation: And certainly, Sāriputta, I recall [that] I [was] an ascetic, one who practiced the spiritual path endowed with four components. Truly, I was that, a supreme ascetic.

3. Sutta Number: DHP338
Pali: yathā'pi mūle anupaddave daḷhe, chinno'pi rukkho puna'r'eva rūhati, evam'pi taṇh'ānusaye anūhate, nibbattatī dukkham'idaṃ punappunaṃ.
English Translation: Just as when a root is free from danger and strong, even if the tree is cut down, it grows again; similarly, when the underlying tendency of craving is not uprooted, suffering arises again and again.

4. Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 6
Pali: saññācikāya pana bhikkhunā kuṭiṃ kārayamānena, assāmikaṃ att'uddesaṃ, pamāṇikā kāretabbā. tatr'idaṃ pamāṇaṃ: dīghaso dvādasa vidatthiyo sugatavidatthiyā, tiriyaṃ satt'antarā.
English Translation: By a monk having a hut made by means of his own begged requisites, without an owner and intended for himself, (the hut) is to be made according to correct measurement. In this case, this is the standard: Twelve spans of the sugata-span in length [and] seven [span] across inside.

5. Sutta Number: DHP407
Pali: yassa rāgo ca doso ca, māno makkho ca pātito, sāsapo'r'iva ār'aggā, tam'ahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.
English Translation: [One] for whom desire and ill-will, conceit and denigrating are dropped (caused to fall), like a mustard seed from the tip of a needle - that one I call a brahmin.

6. Sutta Number: SN47.12
Pali: atha kiñ'carahi ty'āyaṃ, sāriputta, uḷārā āsabhī vācā bhāsitā, ek'aṃso gahito, sīhanādo nadito
English Translation: So, how is it then, Sāriputta, that this lofty, imposing statement, taken as definite, has been spoken, (that) a lion's roar has been roared by you?

7. Sutta Number: MN18
Pali: esevanto rāgānusayānaṃ, esevanto paṭighānusayānaṃ, esevanto diṭṭhānusayānaṃ.
English Translation: Just this is the end of the latent tendencies to passion, just this is the end of the latent tendencies to aversion, just this is the end of the latent tendencies to view.

8. Sutta Number: SNP7
Pali: disvāna bhagavantaṃ etadavoca, tatreva, muṇḍaka, tatreva, samaṇaka, tatreva, vasalaka tiṭṭhāhīti.
English Translation: As soon as he saw the Fortunate One he said, “Stay right there, baldy! Stay right there, tramp! Stay right there, outcast!”

