Class 17 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: MN105
Pali: evam'eva kho, sunakkhatta, ṭhānam'etaṃ vijjati yaṃ idh'ekacco purisapuggalo lok'āmis'ādhimutto assa.
English Translation: In the same way, Sunakkhatta, is it possible that here an individual person would be focused on material pleasure.

2. Sutta Number: MN22
Pali: tassa purisassa uttiṇṇassa pāraṅ'gatassa evam'assa – bahukāro kho me ayaṃ kullo, im'āhaṃ kullaṃ nissāya hatthehi ca pādehi ca vāyamamāno sotthinā pāraṃ uttiṇṇo. 
English Translation: This raft, indeed, [was] extremely helpful for me; being supported by this raft [and] exerting myself with (my) hands and (my) feet, I safely crossed over to the far shore.

3. Sutta Number: MN70
Pali: ev'āhaṁ ajānanto evarūpaṁ sukhaṁ vedanaṁ pajahathā'ti vadeyyaṁ 
English Translation: Not knowing [this], I could myself [then] say, “abandon this kind of pleasant feeling”.

4. Sutta Number: DHP334
Pali: phalam'icchaṃ'va vanasmi vānaro.
English Translation: [like] a monkey wishing only for fruit in a forest grove.

5. Sutta Number: VIN PAT PA 2
Pali: coro'si, bālo'si, mūḷho'si, theno'sī'ti, tathārūpaṃ bhikkhu adinnaṃ ādiyamāno, ayam'pi pārājiko hoti asaṃvāso.
English Translation: “You are a robber! You are a fool! You are a deluded man! You are a thief!”, a monk, taking what has not been given of such a kind, this one also is defeated, unaffiliated.

6. Sutta Number: UD45
Pali: tatiyam'pi kho āyasmā ānando abhikkantāya rattiyā ... yena bhagavā ten'añjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etad'avoca. 
English Translation: Again, for the third time, as the night was (already) advanced, the venerable Ānanda, holding (hands forward in) añjali towards the Blessed One, said this to the Blessed one:

7. Sutta Number:SN 15.1
Pali: yāvañ'c'idaṃ, bhikkhave, alam'eva sabbasaṅkhāresu nibbindituṃ alaṃ virajjituṃ alaṃ vimuccitun'ti. 
English Translation: “In this regard, monks, it is quite enough to become disenchanted in regard to all formations, enough to become detached [from them], enough to become free [from them].”

8. Sutta Number:SNP 16
Pali: etādisāni katvāna, sabbattha'm'aparājitā. sabbattha sotthiṃ gacchanti, taṃ tesaṃ maṅgalam'uttaman'ti. 
English Translation: “Having done [things] of this kind, unconquered everywhere, they go everywhere safely; this is for them highest blessing”

9. Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: ehi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, indriyesu guttadvāro hohi, cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā mā nimittaggāhī hohi m'ānubyañjanaggāhī. 
English Translation: Come, monk, be one who has the doors guarded in regard to the sense faculties; having seen a form with the eye, do not be one enticed by appearances, do not be one grasping after features.

10. Sutta Number: DHP185
Pali: anūpavādo anūpaghāto, pātimokkhe ca saṃvaro 
English Translation: Not insulting, not harming; and restraint according to the disciplinary code.

11. Sutta Number: AN8.53
Pali: yamahaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ sutvā ekā vūpakaṭṭhā appamattā ātāpinī pahitattā vihareyyan'ti
English Translation: Having heard the Buddha's teaching, I could live alone, in solitude, heedful, burning, with resolute determination.

12. Sutta Number: AN5.57 
Pali: sa kho so, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako iti paṭisañcikkhati, na kho ahaññeveko jarādhammo jaraṃ anatīto
English Translation: 

13. Sutta Number: SN22.95 
Pali: kiñhi siyā, bhikkhave, pheṇapiṇḍe sāro?
English Translation: Monks, indeed what substance could there be in a lump of foam?

14. Sutta Number: MN11 
Pali: idamavoca bhagavā. attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. 
English Translation: The Blessed One said this. Those monks were delighted and pleased with the utterance/the words of the Blessed One.

15. Sutta Number: DHP2 
Pali: manopubbaṅgamā dhammā, manoseṭṭhā manomayā
English Translation: All mental phenomena are preceded by mind, led by mind and created by mind.
(Buddharakkhita): Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief, they are all mind-wrought.

16. Sutta Number: AN3.70 
Pali: yadapi, bhikkhave, alobho tadapi kusalamūlaṃ. yadapi aluddho abhisaṅkharoti kāyena vācāya manasā tadapi kusalaṃ.
English Translation: Whatever, monks, is not greed, that is a wholesome root. Whatever a non-greedy person creates by body, by speech or by mind, that too is wholesome.
(Sujato) Contentment is a root of the skilful. When a contented person chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skilful.

17. Sutta Number: MN19
Pali: yaññadeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu bahulamanuvitakketi anuvicāreti, tathā tathā nati hoti cetaso.
English Translation: Whatever a monk thinks and ponders about often, such is the inclination of his mind.

18. Sutta Number: AN4.45
Pali: api cāhaṃ, āvuso, imasmiṃyeva byāmamatte kaḷebare sasaññimhi samanake lokañca paññāpemi lokasamudayañca lokanirodhañca lokanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadan'ti.
English Translation: I also declare, friends, in this very fathom length body with its perception and intelligence (is) the world, the source of the world, the end of the world, and the path of practice leading to the end of the world.

19. Sutta Number: AN10.61
Pali: evañcetaṃ, bhikkhave, vuccati, atha ca pana paññāyati, idappaccayā avijjā'ti
English Translation: Even if it is spoken this way, monks, it is still evident: "Ignorance is on account of a specific condition". 

Class 17 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: SN12.25
Pali: sāmaṃ vā taṃ, ānanda, kāyasaṅkhāraṃ abhisaṅkharoti, yaṃpaccay'āssa taṃ uppajjati ajjhattaṃ sukhadukkhaṃ
English Translation: [Either] by himself he generates that bodily formation on account of which pleasure and pain arise for him internally or…

2. Sutta Number: MN49
Pali: ekam'id'āhaṃ, bhikkhave, samayaṃ ukkaṭṭhāyaṃ viharāmi subhagavane sālarājamūle.
English Translation: On this one occasion, monks, I was dwelling in the blessed wood, in Ukkaṭṭhā, at the root of a king of sāl trees.

3. Sutta Number: DN13.8
Pali: iti uddham'adho tiriyaṃ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjhena pharitvā viharati 
English Translation: Thus, having suffused the world – above, below, across, everywhere, to all beings – with a mind filled with goodwill, [that is] vast, exalted, immeasurable, free of ill-will, [and] not with malevolence, he dwells.

4. Sutta Number: ITI87
Pali: sa ve vitakkāni vicāritāni, sameti vuṭṭhī'va rajaṃ samūhataṃ
English Translation: One truly calms investigated thoughts like rainfall that has removed dust.

5. Sutta Number: MN148
Pali: attā me uppajjati ca veti cā'ti icc'assa evam'āgataṃ hoti. 
English Translation: …and so he would thus conclude (lit: and so to him, it is thus concluded), “my self arises and disappears.”

6. Sutta Number: VV52
Pali: icc'evaṃ vippalapantiṃ, phandamānaṃ tato tato.
English Translation: thus like this chattering, trembling on account of this or that.

7. Sutta Number: UD45
Pali: dutiyampi kho bhagavā tuṇhī ahosi.
English Translation: For the second time, the Blessed One was silent.

8. Sutta Number: AN4.45
Pali: bhūtapubbāhaṃ, bhante, rohitasso nāma isi ahosiṃ bhojaputto iddhimā vehāsaṅgamo.
English Translation: Once upon a time, sir, I was a sage called Rohitassa, son of Bhoja, a sky walker with psychic powers. 

