
Class 3   

Sutta Number: MN4
Pali: ahaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi
English Translation: I go for refuge to the master Gotama

Sutta Number: DHP130 
Pali: sabbe tasanti daṇḍassa.
English Translation: All are fearful of a stick.

Sutta Number: MN27 
Pali: tathāgate saddhaṃ paṭilabhati
English Translation: He obtains faith in the Tathāgata.

Sutta Number: MN64         
Pali: so tattha ṭhito āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpuṇāti.
English Translation: Remaining there, he reaches the destruction of the defilements. 

Sutta Number: DHP354        
Pali: sabbarasaṃ dhammaraso jināti
English Translation: The flavour of the Dhamma surpasses all other flavours.

Sutta Number: MN39 
Pali: so ‘idaṃ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti
English Translation: He knows clearly “this [is] suffering” as it truly is.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT NP 10 
Pali: paṭiggaṇhātu āyasmā cīvaracetāpannaṃ
English Translation: Let the venerable receive the robe-fund.

Sutta Number: DN19.7 (simpl) 
Pali: rājā jotipālaṃ māṇavaṃ āmantayati
English Translation: The king addresses the young gentleman (brahmin), Protector of the Light (Jotipāla). 

Sutta Number: MN39 (simpl) 
Pali: so kāyaṃ vivekajena pītisukhena paripūreti
English Translation: He completely fills up the body with joy and happiness produced by seclusion.

Sutta Number: DN22.18         
Pali: sukhaṃ ca kāyena paṭisaṃvedeti
English Translation: He experiences pleasure by means of the body.

Sutta Number: SNP22
Pali: devā manussā ca sitā tiṭṭhanti 
English Translation: Deities and human beings remain attached.

Sutta Number: SN56.11 (simpl)
Pali: paṭipadā upasamāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati 
English Translation: The path of practice is conducive for calmness, full awakening [and] total emancipation.

Sutta Number: MN27 (simpl)
Pali: dhammaṃ suṇāti putto 
English Translation: The son listens to the Dhamma.

Sutta Number: AN3.71 (simpl)
Pali: sāvako dhammaṃ anussarati 
English Translation: The disciple recollects the Dhamma.

Sutta Number: AN4.180 (simpl)
Pali: āvāse therā viharanti 
English Translation: The elders dwell in the residence.

Sutta Number: MN2.4
parikkhāraṃ paṭisevāmi 
English Translation: I make use of the requisite.

Sutta Number: AN3.79
Pali: kusalā dhammā abhivaḍḍhanti 
English Translation: Wholesome states of mind increase more and more.

Sutta Number: SN22.25 (simpl)
Pali: saṅkhāresu chandaṃ ca rāgaṃ pajahatha. 
English Translation: Abandon interest and desire for volitional formations.

Sutta Number: MN104 (simpl)
Pali: passatha, ānanda, vacanassa pathaṃ 
English Translation: You see, Ānanda, a course of speech

Sutta Number: SN55.6 (simpl)
Pali: suṇāma: kosalehi mallesu pakkamati 
English Translation: We hear: (the Blessed One) sets out from the Kosalans (on tour) in the Mallans.

Sutta Number: MN133 (simpl)
Pali: dhārehi, bhikkhu, uddesaṃ ca vibhaṅgaṃ ca 
English Translation: Remember, monk, the summary and the analysis.

Sutta Number: SN35.248 (simpl)
Pali: puthujjano punabbhavāya ceteti 
English Translation: A common person intends for rebirth.

Sutta Number: SNP34
Pali: passa lokassa pariyāyaṃ. 
English Translation: See the nature of the world.

Sutta Number: MN36
Pali: taṃ suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi, bhāsissāmi 
English Translation: Listen to that, pay attention, I will speak.

Sutta Number: MN107 (simpl)
Pali: pātimokkhe saṃvarena viharāhi 
English Translation: Dwell with restraint according to the disciplinary code!

Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 36
Pali: handa bhikkhu khāda vā bhuñja vā
English Translation: Come on, bhikkhu, eat or consume!

Sutta Number: MN43
Pali: āyasmato sāriputtassa bhāsitaṃ evaṃ ājānāma
English Translation: We understand the statement of venerable Sāriputta thus.

Sutta Number: MN48
Pali: labhāmi paccattaṃ samathaṃ
English Translation: I obtain serenity individually.

Sutta Number: VIN
Pali: passasi taṃ āpattiṃ
English Translation: You see that offence.

Sutta Number: SN41.3
Pali: gahapati, pucchasi — “... diṭṭhiyo loke uppajjanti…
English Translation: You ask, householder: “…views arise in the world…”

Class 3 Extra 

Sutta Number: MN30 (simpl) 
Pali: brāhmaṇa, puggalaṃ vadāmi. 
English Translation: O brahmin, I speak (about) a person.

Sutta Number: SN22.1 (simpl) 
Pali: sādhu āyasmantaṃ sāriputtaṃ paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho 
English Translation: It would be good if the meaning of this statement may become evident to Venerable Sāriputta. (so that he could explain it to us); Fig: It would be good if Ven. Sāriputta would explain the meaning of this statement.


	



	

