Class 24 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: MN140
Pali: tañ'hi'ssa, bhikkhu, n'atthi yena jāyetha, ajāyamāno kiṃ jīyissati, ajīyamāno kiṃ mīyissati, amīyamāno kiṃ kuppissati, akuppamāno kissa pihessati?
English Translation: Monk, there is indeed for him (i.e. he has indeed) not that by which he himself could be born. Not being born, how will he age? Not getting old, how will he die? Not dying, how will he be agitated? Not being agitated, for what will he long?

2. Sutta Number: DHP40
Pali: kumbh'ūpamaṃ kāyam'imaṃ viditvā,
nagar'ūpamaṃ cittam'idaṃ ṭhapetvā.
yodhetha māraṃ paññ'āvudhena, 
jitañ'ca rakkhe anivesano siyā.
English Translation: Having perceived this body [is fragile] like a clay pot, having set up this mind like a fortress, you should fight against death with the weapon of wisdom; one should protect the conquest and be without attachment.

3. Sutta Number: DHP422
Pali: usabhaṃ pavaraṃ vīraṃ, mahesiṃ vijitāvinaṃ,
anejaṃ nhātakaṃ buddhaṃ, tam'ahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.
English Translation: The great sage, the hero, the distinguished noble being who, unmoved, vanquished; the perfected one, the awakened one – him do I call a brahmin (holy man).

4. Sutta Number: ITI62
Pali: tīṇ'imāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. katamāni tīṇi? anaññātaññassāmī't'indriyaṃ, aññ'indriyaṃ, aññātāv'indriyaṃ
English Translation: Monks, [there are] these three mental faculties. Which three? The faculty (that senses) “I will know the unknown,” the faculty of final knowledge, the faculty of one who has understood.

5. Sutta Number: AN6.103
Pali: nibbāne ca santadassāvī bhavissāmi, anusayā ca me samugghātaṃ gacchissanti, kiccakārī ca bhavissāmi, satthā ca me pariciṇṇo bhavissati mettāvatāyā'ti.
English Translation: “I will be one who has seen peacefulness in extinguishment, my underlying tendencies will be(come) exterminated (there will be extermination of my underlying tendencies), I will be one who has done his duty, and my teacher will (have) be(en) served with goodwill.”

6. Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 35
Pali: yo pana bhikkhu bhuttāvī pavārito anatirittaṃ khādanīyaṃ vā bhojanīyaṃ vā khādeyya vā bhuñjeyya vā, pācittiyaṃ.
English Translation: If any monk who has eaten (a meal), who has been invited (to take more and refused), should chew uncooked food or consume food to be savored, which is not left over, [this is a case] involving confession.

7. Sutta Number: SN4.19
Pali: api, samaṇa, balībadde addasā'ti?
English Translation: Perhaps, ascetic, he saw oxen?

8. Sutta Number: MN31
Pali: kiṃ nu kho mayaṃ āyasmato anuruddhassa evam'ārocimha, imāsañ'ca imāsañ'ca vihārasamāpattīnaṃ mayaṃ lābhino'ti
English Translation: “Did we ever inform the venerable Anuruddha, 'We obtain such and such meditation attainments?”

9. Sutta Number: MN18
Pali: ko nu kho imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa vitthārena atthaṃ vibhajeyyā'ti
English Translation: (lit.) Who could analyse the meaning in detail of this brief statement stated and unexplained by the Blessed One, [who could] analyse the meaning in detail?

10. Sutta Number: SN1.71
Pali: kiṃsu chetvā sukhaṃ seti, kiṃsu chetvā na socati, kissassu ekadhammassa, vadhaṃ rocesi gotamā'ti.
English Translation: Having severed what, he sleeps comfortably? Having severed what, he does not mourn? The slaughter of which one thing, O Gotama, do you consent to?

11. Sutta Number: AN3.91
Pali: yathā divā tathā rattiṃ, yathā rattiṃ tathā divā, abhibhuyya disā sabbā, appamāṇasamādhinā.
English Translation: As by day, so by night, as by night, so by day. Overcoming all directions with a boundless stable mind.

12. Sutta Number: AN3.101
Pali: yo, bhikkhave, evaṃ vadeyya, yathā yath'āyaṃ puriso kammaṃ karoti tathā tathā taṃ paṭisaṃvediyatī'ti, evaṃ santaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmacariyavāso na hoti, okāso na paññāyati sammā dukkhassa antakiriyāya.
English Translation: Whoever monks, would say thus, “In whatever way a person performs a deed, in exactly that way he experiences that (result)." This being the case, monks, there is no living the holy life, no opportunity is evident for the complete ending of suffering.

13. Sutta Number: AN10.51
Pali: seyyathā'pi, bhikkhave, ādittacelo vā ādittasīso vā, tass'eva celassa vā sīsassa vā nibbāpanāya adhimattaṃ chandañ'ca vāyāmañ'ca ussāhañ'ca ussoḷhiñ'ca appaṭivāniñ'ca satiñ'ca sampajaññañ'ca kareyya.
English Translation: Imagine if, monks, someone's clothes or head was on fire. He would (set) extreme intention and (make) effort and exertion and tireless determination and (have) mindfulness and clear attention for putting out that exact clothes or head. 

14. Sutta Number: SN46.52/53
Pali: atha kho te bhikkhū tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ bhāsitaṃ n'eva abhinandiṃsu nappaṭikkosiṃsu, anabhinanditvā appaṭikkositvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamiṃsu, bhagavato santike etassa bhāsitassa atthaṃ ājānissāmā'ti.
English Translation: Then those monks neither approved of nor rejected the statement of those wandering ascetics of another religion. Having neither approved of nor rejected, they got up from their seats and left. “We will learn the meaning of this statement in the presence of the Blessed One,” (they said).


15. Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: ehi tvaṃ bhikkhu bhojane mattaññū hohi. paṭisankhā yoniso āhāraṃ āhāreyyāsi n'eva davāya na madāya na maṇḍanāya na vibhūsanāya yāvadeva imassa kāyassa ṭhitiyā yāpanāya vihiṃs'ūparatiyā brahmacariy'ānuggahāya iti purāṇañ'ca vedanaṃ paṭihaṅkhāmi navañ'ca vedanaṃ na uppādessāmi yātrā ca no bhavissati anavajjatā ca phāsu vihāro cā'ti
English Translation: Come, monk! You must be (one) who knows the right measure in eating. Reflecting deeply: you should not eat food for fun, nor for intoxication, nor for embellishment, nor for beautification. Only for as much the continuance of this body and for nourishment of this body, and for avoiding harm to this body, and for supporting the spiritual life. Thus I will destroy the old feelings (of hunger) and not cause a new feeling (of fullness) to arise. And we will have a support, blamelessness and comfortable existence."

Class 24 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: SN22.93
Pali: tassā puriso sotena vuyhamāno kāse ce'pi gaṇheyya, te palujjeyyuṃ. so tatonidānaṃ anayabyasanaṃ āpajjeyya.
English Translation: A person being carried along by its (the rivers) current, even if he grabbed hold of the grasses (growing along the bank), they would break off and because of that he would experience misfortune and disaster.

2. Sutta Number: SN22.95
Pali: seyyathā'pi, bhikkhave, māyākāro vā māyākār'antevāsī vā catumahāpathe māyaṃ vidaṃseyya.
English Translation: Just as a magician or a magician's apprentice would display an illusion at a crossroads (i.e. at the meeting of four great roads).

3. Sutta Number: MN65
Pali: tassa mukh'ādhāne kāraṇaṃ kāriyamānassa honti y'eva visūkāyitāni visevitāni vipphanditāni kānici kānici, yathā taṃ akāritapubbaṃ kāraṇaṃ kāriyamānassa.
English Translation: While [the colt] is being made to do a task with the bit, there are just twistings, tricks, and vacillations in whichever way, [because] it is being made to do that task not previously done before.

4. Sutta Number: SN35.245
Pali: seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, purisassa kiṃsuko adiṭṭhapubbo assa. so yen'aññataro puriso kiṃsukassa dassāvī ten'upasaṅkameyya.
English Translation: Suppose there were (lit: would be) a man who had never seen a parrot tree before (lit: by whom a parrot tree had not been seen before); he would approach a certain person who has seen a parrot tree….

5. Sutta Number: AN10.61
Pali: ko c'āhāro ayonisomanasikārassa. assaddhiyan'ti'ssa vacanīyaṃ. assaddhiyam'p'āhaṃ, bhikkhave, sāhāraṃ vadāmi, no anāhāraṃ. ko c'āhāro assaddhiyassa. asaddhammassavanan'ti'ssa vacanīyaṃ
English Translation: And what is the fuel for improper attention? It should be said of this, “lack of belief.” And monks, lack of belief has a fuel, it is not fuel-less. What is the fuel for lack of belief? It should be said of this, “not listening to the true teaching.”