Class 19 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: DN2.19
Pali: seyyathā'pi, mahārāja, puriso iṇaṃ ādāya kamm'ante payojeyya. tassa te kamm'antā samijjheyyuṃ.
English Translation: Imagine if, o great king, a man taking [out] a loan would engage in work. And these activities of his would succeed.

2. Sutta Number: MN48
Pali: cha'y'ime, bhikkhave, dhammā sāraṇīyā piyakaraṇā garukaraṇā saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattanti.
English Translation: [There are] these six qualities to be desired, monks, creating affection and respect, lead to mutual assistance, harmony, concord and unity.

3. Sutta Number: AN3.24
Pali: puggalo āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭh'eva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati
English Translation: With the exhaustion of the taints, an individual, having personally experienced in this life directly knowing by himself the liberation of the mind without taints, liberation by wisdom, dwells having reached [this state].

4. Sutta Number: SN12.22
Pali: alam'eva saddhāpabbajitena kulaputtena vīriyaṃ ārabhituṃ
English Translation: It is quite enough for a respectable young man who ordained out of confidence to undertake the effort. (lit: it is enough to undertake the effort by a respectable young man…)

5. Sutta Number: AN10.58
Pali: sat'ādhipateyyā sabbe dhammā, paññ'uttarā sabbe dhammā, vimuttisārā sabbe dhammā, amat'ogadhā sabbe dhammā, nibbānapariyosānā sabbe dhammā'ti
English Translation: “All things are governed by mindfulness, all things have understanding as (their) highest, all things have liberation as [their] core, all things are plunged into the deathless, all things are culminating in extinguishment.”

6. Sutta Number: SN55.31
Pali: ayaṃ paṭhamo puññ'ābhisando kusal'ābhisando sukhass'āhāro.
English Translation: This is the first outflow of merit, [the first] outflow of wholesome, [which is] a cause (or nutriment) for comfort.

7. Sutta Number: MN10.3
Pali: samudayadhammānupassī vā kāyasmiṃ viharati, vayadhammānupassī vā kāyasmiṃ viharati, samudayavayadhammānupassī vā kāyasmiṃ viharati.
English Translation: He remains in the body observing arising phenomena, he remains in the body observing disappearing phenomena, he remains in the body observing arising and disappearing phenomena.
8. Sutta Number: MN33
Pali: idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye desiyamāne na labhati atthavedaṃ, na labhati dhammavedaṃ, na labhati dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ pāmojjaṃ.
English Translation: Monks, in this case, when the doctrine and discipline declared by the Buddha is being preached, monk does not get inspiration from the meaning, he does not get inspiration from the teaching, he does not get the happiness connected with the teaching.

9. Sutta Number: SN20.7
Pali: ye te suttantā tathāgatabhāsitā gambhīrā gambhīratthā lokuttarā suññatāpaṭisaṃyuttā tesu bhaññamānesu na sussūsanti.
English Translation: There are those discourses preached by the Such Become One that are deep, with profound meaning, world transcending, concerned with emptiness. When they are being preached, they do not wish to listen.

10. Sutta Number: AN3.125
Pali: imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne sahassī lokadhātu akampitthāti.
English Translation: “And when this explanation was being spoken, the one-thousand-world system shook.”

11. Sutta Number: AN5.157
Pali: dussīlo, bhikkhave, sīlakathāya kacchamānāya abhisajjati kuppati byāpajjati patitthīyati kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātukaroti.
English Translation: When talk about morality is being spoken, an immoral person curses, gets angry and is obstinate; he displays anger, ill will and outrage.

12. Sutta Number: AN6.62
Pali: seyyathāpi vā panānanda, rattiyā paccūsasamayaṃ sūriye uggacchante, jāneyyāsi tvaṃ, ānanda, andhakāro antaradhāyissati, āloko pātubhavissatī'ti?
English Translation: Just like Ananda, in the early dawn time of night, when the sun is rising, you would know, Ananda, “Darkness will disappear (and) light will appear.”

13. Sutta Number: UD45
Pali: tatiyampi kho āyasmā ānando abhikkantāya rattiyā, nikkhante pacchime yāme, uddhaste aruṇe, nandimukhiyā rattiyā uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca.
English Translation: And then for the third time, when the night had progressed, when the final watch had passed, when dawn had risen and the night had a cheerful face, Venerable Ananda rose from his seat, adjusted his robe on one shoulder, stretched out his palms together towards the Blessed One, and said this to the Blessed One

Class 19 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: SN1.13
Pali: sāvatthinidānaṃ. ekam'antaṃ ṭhitā kho sā devatā bhagavato santike imaṃ gāthaṃ abhāsi.
English Translation: [This] took place at Sāvatthi. That deity stood to one side in the presence of the Blessed One, [and] then spoke this verse.

2. Sutta Number: MN30
Pali: akuppā cetovimutti - etad'attham'idaṃ, brāhmaṇa, brahmacariyaṃ
English Translation: Unshakable mental liberation, brahmin, - this holy life [has] that as a goal.

3. Sutta Number: MN70
Pali: kīva dūr'ev'ime, bhikkhave, moghapurisā apakkantā imamhā dhammavinayā. 
English Translation: Just how far are these foolish men who have departed from this doctrine and discipline?

4. Sutta Number: VIN1.1.2
Pali: ye te bhikkhū app'icchā santuṭṭhā lajjino kukkuccakā sikkhākāmā te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti
English Translation: Those monks who are of few wishes, content, conscientious, scrupulous, [and] desiring training, find fault, criticise and discuss widely [about Venerable Dhaniya]. (source text uses past tense)

5. Sutta Number: DN22.18
Pali: vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati.
English Translation: With the settling of thoughts and examinations, [by gaining] settled assurance internally and singleness of mind, and having entered the second state of deep meditative calm, [which is ] free from thinking, free from examining, [and with] joy and happiness born from being collected, he dwells.

6. Sutta Number: MN18
Pali: yaṃ papañceti tatonidānaṃ purisaṃ papañcasaññāsaṅkhā samudācaranti atītānāgatapaccuppannesu cakkhuviññeyyesu rūpesu.
English Translation: Whatever he proliferates about, because of that proliferations, perceptions, and concepts regarding forms perceivable by the eye in the past, future, and present overwhelm a man.