Class 20 Exercises

1. Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: byāpādapadosaṃ pahāya abyāpannacitto viharati sabbapāṇabhūtahit'ānukampī
English Translation: Abandoning ill-will and hatred, he dwells with a mind without ill-will, compassionate for the welfare of all living beings.

2. Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 70
Pali: ajja't'agge te, āvuso, samaṇ'uddesa na c'eva so bhagavā satthā apadisitabbo
English Translation: From today onwards, friend novice, the Blessed One is not to be referred to as the teacher by you.

3. Sutta Number: DHP064
Pali: yāvajīvam'pi ce bālo, paṇḍitaṃ payirupāsati,  
na so dhammaṃ vijānāti, dabbī sūparasaṃ yathā.
English Translation: [Even] if a fool associates closely with a wise person for the rest of his life, he will not (lit: does not) comprehend the doctrine, as a spoon [does not comprehend] the taste of the soup.

4. Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 63
Pali: yo pana bhikkhu jānaṃ yathādhammaṃ nihat'ādhikaraṇaṃ punakammāya ukkoṭeyya, pācittiyaṃ.
English Translation: If any monk should knowingly re-open for further action a legal issue which has been disposed of according to the rule, [this is an offence] involving confession.

5. Sutta Number: DHP356
Pali: tiṇadosāni khettāni, rāgadosā ayaṃ pajā, tasmā hi vītarāgesu, dinnaṃ hoti mahapphalaṃ.
English Translation: Fields are ruined by weeds, this generation is ruined by desire; that is why an offering to [those who are] free from desires is indeed of great fruit.

6. Sutta Number: SN42.6
Pali: taṃ kiṃ maññasi, gāmaṇi, idh'assa puriso pāṇ'ātipātī adinn'ādāyī kāmesumicchācārī musāvādī pisuṇavāco pharusavāco samphappalāpī abhijjhālu byāpannacitto micchādiṭṭhiko. 
English Translation: What do you think, headman, here could be a person who kills living being, takes what is not given, who engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, divisively, harshly, and chatters frivolously, [one] who is covetous, has a malicious mind and holds a wrong view.

7. Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: so pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā 
English Translation: After the meal, after returning from alms-round, he sits down, having folded [his legs] into a cross-legged sitting position, positioning the body uprightly, having set up mindfulness as first priority. 

8. Sutta Number: DN22.18
Pali: savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati
English Translation: Having reached the first stage of meditation, which has thinking and discursive thought, and joy and happiness born from solitude, he dwells there.

9. Sutta Number: MN51
Pali: kālavādī bhūtavādī atthavādī dhammavādī vinayavādī nidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā hoti kālena sāpadesaṃ pariyantavatiṃ atthasaṃhitaṃ
English Translation: He speaks at the right time, speaks the truth, speaks what is of benefit, speaks about the doctrine, speaks about the discipline, a speaker of words worth treasuring; at a suitable time, [he speaks] reasonable, within a limit and [what is] advantageous.

10. Sutta Number: AN7.61
Pali: viggāhikāya moggallāna kathāya sati kathābāhullaṃ pāṭikaṅkhaṃ, kathābāhulle sati uddhaccaṃ
English Translation: Moggallāna, when there is quarrelsome talk, an excess of speech is to be expected. When there is an abundance of talk, there is agitation.

11. Sutta Number: SN12.23
Pali: seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uparipabbate thullaphusitake deve vassante taṃ udakaṃ yathāninnaṃ pavattamānaṃ pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūreti.
English Translation: Just as when the sky is raining big drops (of rain) on top of the mountain, that water, proceeding downwards, fills up the mountain cracks, crevices and creeks.

12. Sutta Number: MN40
Pali: ehi tvaṃ, bhadramukha, saṅghāṭiko hohi, saṅghāṭikassa te sato saṅghāṭidhāraṇamattena abhijjhālussa abhijjhā pahīyissati.
English Translation: Come, my dear! Be someone who wears a patchwork robe! When you are someone who wears a patchwork robe, when you are covetous, by the mere fact of wearing a patchwork robe, covetousness will be abandoned.

13. Sutta Number: MN40
Pali: tassa sabbehi imehi pāpakehi akusalehi dhammehi visuddhamattānaṃ samanupassato, vimuttamattānaṃ samanupassato, pāmojjaṃ jāyati, pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṃ vedeti, sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati.
English Translation: When he sees himself pure and free from all these bad, unskilful mental states, happiness arises. for one who is happy delight arises. for one who has a joyful mind the body relaxes. One with a relaxed body experiences ease. for who is at ease the mind becomes settled.

14. Sutta Number: AN10.176
Pali: brāhmaṇā, bhante, pacchābhūmakā kamaṇḍalukā sevālamālikā aggiparicārikā udakorohakā soceyyāni paññapenti, tesāhaṃ soceyyāni rocemī'ti
English Translation: Venerable sir, the Brahmans from the Western lands who carry water pitchers, who wear moss garlands, who tend the sacred fire, who bathe ritually, they declare purification rites. I approve of their purification rites.

Class 20 Extra Examples

1. Sutta Number: DN22.18
Pali: sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā, pubb'eva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅ'gamā, adukkham'asukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati.
English Translation: With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the passing away of joy and dejection already before, he dwells having entered into the fourth stage of meditation, which has no pleasure and no pain, (but) has purification of awareness due to equanimity.

2. Sutta Number: MN91
Pali: dvīsu mahāpurisalakkhaṇesu kaṅkhati vicikicchati n'ādhimuccati na sampasīdati, kos'ohite ca vatthaguyhe, pahūtajivhatāya ca.
English Translation: He has doubt, he is uncertain about two auspicious marks of a great man, he has not made up his mind [and] is unsettled regarding [them]: about the genitals being enclosed in a sheath and about the largeness of the tongue.

3. Sutta Number: SN3.11
Pali: tena kho pana samayena satta ca jaṭilā satta ca nigaṇṭhā satta ca acelakā satta ca ekasāṭakā satta ca paribbājakā parūḷhakacchanakhalomā khārivividham'ādāya bhagavato avidūre atikkamanti.
English Translation: Now on that occasion, seven dread-locked ascetics, seven Jains, seven naked ascetics, seven one-robe ascetics, and seven wandering ascetics, with long armpit hair, nails and body hair, and carrying bundles of personal belongings on a pole, passed by near to the Blessed One.

4. Sutta Number: MN12
Pali: assosi kho āyasmā sāriputto sunakkhattassa licchaviputtassa vesāliyaṃ parisati evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsamānassa - natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttarimanussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso.
English Translation: Venerable Sariputta heard when Lucky Star, the young Licchavi, was talking in the Vesali assembly (saying), “The Ascetic Gotama has no super-powers, a distinction of knowledge and vision worthy of the Noble One's.”